before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
speak, speak.
you are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
resolved.
resolved.
first, you know caius marcius is chief enemy to the people.
we know't, we know't.
let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
is't a verdict?
no more talking on't away, away!
one word, good citizens.
we are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance our sufferance is a gain to them let us revenge this with our pikes, for the gods know i speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
would you proceed especially against caius marcius?
he's a very dog to the commonalty.
consider you what services he has done for his country?
very well and could be content to give him good report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
nay, but speak not maliciously.
i say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did though softconscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
what he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him.
you must in no way say he is covetous.
if i must not, i need not be barren of accusations he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
what shouts are these?
the other side o' the city why stay we prating here?
to the capitol!
come, come.
soft!
who comes here?
worthy menenius agrippa one that hath always loved the people.
he' would all the rest were so!
what work's, my countrymen, in hand?
where go you with bats and clubs?
the matter?
speak, i pray you.
our business is not unknown to the senate they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds.
they say poor they shall know we have strong arms too.
why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours, will you undo yourselves?
we cannot, sir, we are undone already.
i tell you, friends, most charitable care have the patricians of you.
for your wants, your suffering in this dearth, you may as well strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them against the roman state, whose course will on the way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs of more strong link asunder than can ever appear in your impediment.
for the dearth, the gods, not the patricians, make it, and your knees to them, not arms, must help.
alack, you are transported by calamity thither where more attends you, and you slander the helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers, when you curse them as enemies.
care for us!
true, indeed!
they ne'er cared for us suffer us to famish, and their storehouses crammed with grain make edicts for usury, to support usurers repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor.
if the wars eat us not up, they will and there's all the love they bear us.
either you must confess yourselves wondrous malicious, or be accused of folly.
i shall tell you it may be you have heard it but, since it serves my purpose, i will venture to stale 't a little more.
well, i'll hear it, yet you must not think to but, an 't please you, deliver.
there was a time when all the body's members rebell'd against the belly, that only like a gulf it did remain i' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, still cupboarding the viand, never bearing like labour with the rest, where the other instruments did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel, and, mutually participate, did minister unto the appetite and affection common of the whole body.
the belly answer'd well, sir, what answer made the belly?
sir, i shall tell you.
with a kind of smile, which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus for, look you, i may make the belly smile as well as speakit tauntingly replied to the discontented members, the mutinous parts that envied his receipt even so most fitly as you malign our senators for that they are not such as you.
your belly's answer?
what!
the kinglycrowned head, the vigilant eye, the counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
with other muniments and petty helps in this our fabric, if that they what then?
'fore me, this fellow speaks!
what then?
what then?
should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd, who is the sink o' the body, well, what then?
the former agents, if they did complain, what could the belly answer?
i will tell you if you'll bestow a smallof what you have little patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
ye're long about it.
note me this, good friend your most grave belly was deliberate, not rash like his accusers, and thus answer' 'true is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'that i receive the general food at first, which you do live upon and fit it is, because i am the storehouse and the shop but, if you do remember, i send it through the rivers of your blood, even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain and, through the cranks and offices of man, the strongest nerves and small inferior veins from me receive that natural competency and though that all at once, you, my good friends,'this says the belly, mark me, ay, sir well, well.
'though all at once cannot see what i do deliver out to each, yet i can make my audit up, that all from me do back receive the flour of all, and leave me but the bran.
' what say you to't?
how apply you this?
the senators of rome are this good belly, and you the mutinous members for examine their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly touching the weal o' the common, you shall find no public benefit which you receive but it proceeds or comes from them to you and no way from yourselves.
what do you think, you, the great toe of this assembly?
i the great toe!
why the great toe?
for that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest, of this most wise rebellion, thou go' thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run, lead'st first to win some vantage.
rome and her rats are at the point of battle the one side must have bale.
hail, noble marcius!
thanks.
what's the matter, you dissentious rogues, that, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, make yourselves scabs?
we have ever your good word.
he that will give good words to thee will flatter beneath abhorring.
what would you have, you curs, that like nor peace nor war?
the one affrights you, the other makes you proud.
he that trusts to you, where he should find you lions, finds you hares where foxes, you are no surer, no, than is the coal of fire upon the ice, or hailstone in the sun.
your virtue is to make him worthy whose offence subdues him and curse that justice did it.
who deserves greatness deserves your hate and your affections are a sick man's appetite, who desires most that which would increase his evil.
he that depends upon your favours swims with fins of lead and hews down oaks with rushes.
hang ye!
trust ye?
with every minute you do change a mind, and call him noble that was now your hate, him vile that was your garland.
what's the matter, that in these several places of the city you cry against the noble senate, who, under the gods, keep you in awe, which else would feed on one another?
what's their seeking?
for corn at their own rates whereof, they say, the city is well stored.
hang 'em!
they say!
they'll sit by the fire, and presume to know what's done i' the capitol who's like to rise, who thrives and who declines side factions and give out conjectural marriages making parties strong and feebling such as stand not in their liking below their cobbled shoes.
they say there's grain enough!
would the nobility lay aside their ruth, and let me use my sword, i'll make a quarry with thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high as i could pick my lance.
nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded for though abundantly they lack discretion, yet are they passing cowardly.
but, i beseech you, what says the other troop?
hang 'em!
they said they were anhungry sigh'd forth proverbs, that hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, that meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not with these shreds they vented their complainings which being answer'd, and a petition granted them, a strange one to break the heart of generosity, and make bold power look palethey threw their caps as they would hang them on the horns o' the moon, shouting their emulation.
what is granted them?
five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms, one's junius brutus, sicinius velutus, and i know not'sdeath!
the rabble should have first unroof'd the city, ere so prevail' it will in time win upon power and throw forth greater themes for insurrection's arguing.
this is strange.
go, get you home, you fragments!
where's caius marcius?
what's the matter?
the news is, sir, the volsces are in arms.
i am glad on ' then we shall ha' means to vent our musty superfluity.
see, our best elders.
marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us the volsces are in arms.
they have a leader, tullus aufidius, that will put you to 't.
i sin in envying his nobility, and were i any thing but what i am, i would wish me only he.
you have fought together.
were half to half the world by the ears and he.
upon my party, i'ld revolt to make he is a lion that i am proud to hunt.
then, worthy marcius, attend upon cominius to these wars.
it is your former promise.
sir, it is and i am constant.
titus lartius, thou shalt see me once more strike at tullus' face.
what, art thou stiff?
stand'st out?
no, caius marcius i'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other, ere stay behind this business.
o, truebred!
your company to the capitol where, i know, our greatest friends attend us.
noble marcius!
nay, the volsces have much corn take these rats thither to gnaw their garners.
worshipful mutiners, pray, follow.
was ever man so proud as is this marcius?
he has no equal.
when we were chosen tribunes for the people, mark'd you his lip and eyes?
nay.
but his taunts.
being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
bemock the modest moon.
he is grown too proud to be so valiant.
such a nature, tickled with good success, disdains the shadow but i do wonder his insolence can brook to be commanded under cominius.
fame, at the which he aims, in whom already he's well graced, can not better be held nor more attain'd than by for what miscarries shall be the general's fault, though he perform to the utmost of a man, and giddy censure will then cry out of marcius 'o if he had borne the business!
' besides, if things go well, opinion that so sticks on marcius shall of his demerits rob cominius.
half all cominius' honours are to marcius.
though marcius earned them not, and all his faults to marcius shall be honours, though indeed in aught he merit not.
let's hence, and hear how the dispatch is made, and in what fashion, more than his singularity, he goes upon this present action.
lets along.
so, your opinion is, aufidius, that they of rome are entered in our counsels and know how we proceed.
is it not yours?
what ever have been thought on in this state, that could be brought to bodily act ere rome had circumvention?
'tis not four days gone since i heard thence i think i have the letter here yes, here it is.
'they have press'd a power, but it is not known the dearth is great the people mutinous and it is rumour'd, cominius, marcius your old enemy, who is of rome worse hated than of you, and titus lartius, a most valiant roman, these three lead on this preparation whither ' most likely ' consider of it.
' our army's in the field we never yet made doubt but rome was ready to answer us.
nor did you think it folly to keep your great pretences veil'd till when they needs must show themselves which in the hatching, it seem'd, appear'd to rome.
by the discovery.
we shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was to take in many towns ere almost rome should know we were afoot.
noble aufidius, take your commission if they set down before 's, for the remove bring your army but, i think, you'll find they've not prepared for us.
o, doubt not that i speak from certainties.
nay, more, some parcels of their power are forth already, and only hitherward.
i leave your honours.
if we and caius marcius chance to meet, 'tis sworn between us we shall ever strike till one can do no more.
the gods assist you!
and keep your honours safe!
farewell.
farewell.
farewell.
i pray you, daughter, sing or express yourself in a if my son were my husband, i should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where he would show most love.
when yet he was but tenderbodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, i, considering how honour would become such a person.
that it was no better than picturelike to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame.
to a cruel war i sent him from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak.
i tell thee, daughter, i sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a manchild than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
but had he died in the business, madam how then?
then his good report should have been my son i therein would have found issue.
hear me profess had i a dozen sons, each in my love alike and none less dear than thine and my good marcius, i had rather had eleven die nobly for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
madam, the lady valeria is come to visit you.
beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
indeed, you shall not.
methinks i hear hither your husband's drum, see him pluck aufidius down by the hair, as children from a bear, methinks i see him stamp thus, 'come on, you cowards!
you were got in fear, ' his bloody brow with his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes, like to a harvestman that's task'd to mow or all or lose his hire.
his bloody brow!
o jupiter, no blood!
away, you fool!
it more becomes a man the breasts of hecuba, when she did suckle hector, look'd not lovelier than hector's forehead when it spit forth blood at grecian sword, contemning.
tell valeria, we are fit to bid her welcome.
heavens bless my lord from fell aufidius!
he'll beat aufidius 'head below his knee and tread upon his neck.
my ladies both, good day to you.
sweet madam.
i am glad to see your ladyship.
how do you both?
you are manifest housekeepers.
what are you sewing here?
a fine spot, in good faith.
how does your little son?
i thank your ladyship well, good madam.
he had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than look upon his schoolmaster.
o' my word, the father' i'll swear,'tis a very pretty boy.
o' my troth, i looked upon him o' has such a confirmed countenance.
i saw him run after a gilded and when he caught it, he let it go again and after it again and over and over he comes, and again catched it again or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his teeth and tear it o, i warrant it, how he mammocked it!
one on 's father's moods.
indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.
a crack, madam.
come, lay aside your stitchery i must have you play the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
no, good madam i will not out of doors.
not out of doors!
she shall, she shall.
indeed, no, by your patience i'll not over the threshold till my lord return from the wars.
fie, come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
i will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my prayers but i cannot go thither.
why, i pray you?
'tis not to save labour, nor that i want love.
yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in ulysses' absence did but fill ithaca full of moths.
come i would your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity.
come, you shall go with us.
no, good madam, pardon me indeed, i will not forth.
in truth, la, go with me and i'll tell you excellent news of your husband.
o, good madam, there can be none yet.
verily, i do not jest with you there came news from him last night.
indeed, madam?
in earnest, it's true i heard a senator speak it.
the volsces have an army forth against whom cominius the general is gone, with one part of your lord and titus lartius are set down before their city corioli they nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars.
this is true, on mine honour and so, i pray, go with us.
give me excuse, good madam i will obey you in every thing hereafter.
let her alone, as she is now, she will but disease our better mirth.
in troth, i think she would.
fare you well, then.
come, good sweet lady.
prithee, virgilia, turn thy solemness out o' door.
and go along with us.
no, at a word, madam indeed, i must not.
i wish you much mirth.
well, then, farewell.
yonder comes news.
a wager they have met.
my horse to yours, no.
'tis done.
agreed.
say, has our general met the enemy?
they lie in view but have not spoke as yet.
so, the good horse is mine.
i'll buy him of you.
no, i' lend you him i will for half a hundred years.
summon the town.
how far off lie these armies?
within this mile and half.
then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
now, mars, i prithee, make us quick in work, that we with smoking swords may march from hence, to help our fielded friends!
come, blow thy blast.
tutus aufidius, is he within your walls?
no, nor a man that fears you less than he, that's lesser than a little.
hark!
our drums are bringing forth our youth.
we'll break our walls, our gates, which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes they'll open of themselves.
hark you.
far off!
there is aufidius list, what work he makes amongst your cloven army.
o, they are at it!
their noise be our instruction.
ladders, ho!
they fear us not, but issue forth their city.
now put your shields before your hearts, and fight with hearts more proof than shields.
advance, they do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, which makes me sweat with wrath.
come on, he that retires i'll take him for a volsce, and he shall feel mine edge.
all the contagion of the south light on you, you shames of rome!
you herd ofboils and plagues plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd further than seen and one infect another against the wind a mile!
you souls of geese, that bear the shapes of men, how have you run from slaves that apes would beat!
pluto and hell!
all hurt behind backs red, and faces pale with flight and agued fear!
mend and charge home, or, by the fires of heaven, i'll leave the foe look to' come on if you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives, as they us to our trenches followed.
so, 'tis for the followers fortune widens them, mark me, and do the like.
foolhardiness not i.
nor i.
see, they have shut him in.
to the pot, i warrant him.
what is become of marcius?
slain, sir, doubtless.
following the fliers at the very heels, with them he enters who, upon the sudden, clapp' he is himself alone, to answer all the city.
o noble fellow!
who sensibly outdares his senseless sword, and, when it bows, stands up.
thou art left, a carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, were not so rich a jewel.
thou wast a soldier even to cato's wish, not fierce and terrible only in strokes but, with thy grim looks and the thunderlike percussion of thy sounds, thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world were feverous and did tremble.
look, sir.
o,'tis marcius!
let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
this will i carry to rome.
and i this.
a murrain on't!
i took this for silver.
see here these movers that do prize their hours at a crack'd drachm!
cushions, leaden spoons, irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would bury with those that wore them, these base slaves, ere yet the fight be done, down with them!
and hark, what noise the general makes!
to him!
there is the man of my soul's hate, aufidius, then, valiant titus, take convenient numbers to make good the city whilst i, with those that have the spirit, will haste to help cominius.
worthy sir, thou bleed'st thy exercise hath been too violent for a second course of fight.
sir, praise me not my work hath yet not warm' the blood i drop is rather physical to aufidius thus i will appear, and fight.
now the fair goddess, fortune, fall deep in love with thee and her great charms misguide thy opposers' swords!
bold gentleman, prosperity be thy page!
thy friend no less than those she placeth highest!
so, farewell.
thou worthiest marcius!
go, sound thy trumpet in the marketplace call thither all the officers o' the town, away!
breathe you, well fought we are come off like romans, neither foolish in our stands, believe me, sirs, we shall be charged again.
whiles we have struck, by interims and conveying gusts we have heard the charges of our friends.
ye roman gods!
lead their successes as we wish our own, that both our powers, with smiling fronts encountering, may give you thankful sacrifice.
thy news?
the citizens of corioli have issued, i saw our party to their trenches driven, and then i came away.
though thou speak'st truth, methinks thou speak'st not well.
how long is't since?
above an hour, my lord.
'tis not a mile how couldst thou in a mile confound an hour, and bring thy news so late?
spies of the volsces held me in chase, that i was forced to wheel three or four miles about, else had i, sir, half an hour since brought my report.
who's yonder, that does appear as he were flay'd?
o gods he has the stamp of marcius and i have beforetime seen him thus.
the shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour more than i know the sound of marcius' tongue from every meaner man.
come i too late?
ay, if you come not in the blood of others, but mantled in your own.
o, let me clip ye in arms as sound as when i woo'd, in heart as merry as when our nuptial day was done, and tapers burn'd to bedward!
flower of warriors, how is it with titus lartius?
condemning some to death, and some to exile ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other holding corioli in the name of rome, even like a fawning greyhound in the leash, to let him slip at will.
where is that slave which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
where is he?
call him hither.
let him alone but for our gentlemen, the common filea plague!
tribunes for them!
the mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge from rascals worse than they.
but how prevail'd you?
will the time serve to tell?
i do not think.
where is the enemy?
are you lords o' the field?
if not, why cease you till you are so?
marcius, we have at disadvantage fought and did retire to win our purpose.
how lies their battle?
know you on which side they have placed their men of trust?
as i guess, marcius, their bands i' the vaward are the antiates, of their best trust o'er them aufidius, their very heart of hope.
i do beseech you, by all the battles wherein we have fought, by the blood we have shed together, by the vows we have made to endure friends, that you directly set me against aufidius and his antiates and that you not delay the present, but, filling the air with swords advanced and darts, we prove this very hour.
though i could wish you were conducted to a gentle bath and balms applied to, you, yet dare i never take your choice of those that best can aid your action.
those are they that most are willing.
if any such be here as it were sin to doubtthat love this painting wherein you see me smear'd if any fear lesser his person than an ill report if any think brave death outweighs bad life and that his country's dearer than himself let him alone, or so many so minded, wave thus, to express his disposition, and follow marcius.
o, me alone!
make you a sword of me?
if these shows be not outward, which of you but is four volsces?
none of you but is able to bear against the great aufidius a shield as hard as his.
a certain number, though thanks to all, must i select the rest shall bear the business in some other fight, as cause will be obey'd.
please you to march and four shall quickly draw out my command, which men are best inclined.
march on, make good this ostentation, and you shall divide in all with us.
so, keep your duties, as i have set them down.
if i do send, dispatch the rest will serve if we lose the field, we cannot keep the town.
fear not our care, sir.
hence, and shut your gates upon's.
our guider, come to the roman camp conduct us.
i'll fight with none but thee for i do hate thee worse than a promisebreaker.
not afric owns a serpent i abhor more than thy fame and envy.
fix thy foot.
let the first budger die the other's slave, and the gods doom him after!
if i fly, marcius, holloa me like a hare.
within these three hours, tullus, alone i fought in your corioli walls, 'tis not my blood wherein thou seest me mask'd for thy revenge wrench up thy power to the highest.
wert thou the hector that was the whip of your bragg'd progeny, thou shouldst not scape me here.
officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me in your condemned seconds.
if i should tell thee o'er this thy day's work, thou' but i'll report it where senators shall mingle tears with smiles, where great patricians shall attend and shrug, i' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted, and, gladly quaked, hear more where the dull tribunes, that, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours, shall say against their hearts 'we thank the gods our rome hath such a soldier.
' yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, having fully dined before.
o general, here is the steed, hadst thou beheld pray now, my mother, who has a charter to extol her blood, when she does praise me grieves me.
i have done as you have done that's what i can induced as you have been that' he that has but effected his good will hath overta'en mine act.
you shall not be the grave of your deserving rome must know 'twere a concealment worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, to hide your doings and to silence that, which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd, therefore, i beseech you in sign of what you are, not to reward what you have donebefore our army hear me.
i have some wounds upon me, and they smart to hear themselves remember'd.
should they not, well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude, and tent themselves with death.
of all the horses, whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all the treasure in this field achieved and city, we render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth, before the common distribution, at your only choice.
i thank you, general but cannot make my heart consent to take i do refuse it and stand upon my common part with those that have beheld the doing.
may these same instruments, which you profane, never sound more!
when drums and trumpets shall i' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be made all of falsefaced soothing!
when steel grows soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made a coverture for the wars!
no more, i say!
for that i have not wash'd my nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.
which, without note, here's many else have done, you shout me forth in acclamations hyperbolical as if i loved my little should be dieted in praises sauced with lies.
too modest are you more cruel to your good report than grateful by your patience, if 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you, like one that means his proper harm, in manacles, then reason safely with you.
therefore, be it known, as to us, to all the world, that caius marcius wears this war' in token of the which, my noble steed, known to the camp, i give him, with all his trim belonging and from this time, for what he did before corioli, call him, with all the applause and clamour of the host, caius marcius coriolanus!
bear the addition nobly ever!
caius marcius coriolanus!
i will go wash and when my face is fair, you shall perceive howbeit, i thank you.
i mean to stride your steed, and at all times to undercrest your good addition to the fairness of my power.
so, to our tent where, ere we do repose us, we will write to rome of our success.
you, titus lartius, send us to rome the best, with whom we may articulate, for their own good and ours.
i shall, my lord.
the gods begin to mock me.
i, that now refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg of my lord general.
take't 'tis yours.
what is't?
i sometime lay here in corioli at a poor man's house he cried to me i saw him prisoner but then aufidius was within my view, and wrath o'erwhelm' i request you to give my poor host freedom.
o, well begg'd!
were he the butcher of my son, he should be free as is the wind.
deliver him, titus.
marcius, his name?
by jupiter!
forgot.
i am weary yea, my memory is tired.
have we no wine here?
the blood upon your visage dries 'tis time it should be look' come.
the town is ta'en!
'twill be deliver'd back on good condition.
condition!
i would i were a roman for i cannot, being a volsce, be that i am.
condition!
what good condition can a treaty find i' the part that is at mercy?
five times, marcius, so often hast thou beat me, and wouldst do so, i think, should we encounter as often as we eat.
by the elements, if e'er again i meet him beard to beard, he's mine, mine emulation hath not that honour in't it had for where i thought to crush him in an equal force, true sword to sword, i'll potch at him some way or wrath or craft may get him.
he's the devil.
bolder, though not so subtle.
my valour's poison'd with only suffering stain by him for him nor sleep nor sanctuary, being naked, sick, nor fane nor capitol, the prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, embarquements all of fury, shall lift up their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst where i find him, were it at home, upon my brother's guard, even there, against the hospitable canon, would i wash my fierce hand in's heart.
go you to the city learn how 'tis held and what they are that must be hostages for rome.
will not you go?
i pray you 'tis south the city millsbring me word thither how the world goes, that to the pace of it i may spur on my journey.
i shall, sir.
the augurer tells me we shall have news tonight.
good or bad?
not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not marcius.
nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
pray you, who does the wolf love?
the lamb.
ay, to devour him as the hungry plebeians would the noble marcius.
he's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
he's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb.
you two tell me one thing that i shall ask you.
well, sir.
in what enormity is marcius poor in, that you two have not in abundance?
he's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
especially in pride.
and topping all others in boasting.
do you two know how you are censured here in the city, i mean of us o' the righthand file?
do you?
why, how are we censured?
because you talk of pride now,will you not be angry?
well, well, sir, well.
why, 'tis no great matter for a very little thief of give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so.
you blame marcius for being proud?
we do it not alone, sir.
i know you can do very little alone for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous your abilities are too infantlike for doing much alone.
o that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
o that you could!
what then, sir?
why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in rome.
menenius, you are known well enough too.
i am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying tiber in't said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint hasty and tinderlike upon too trivial motion one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead what i think i utter, and spend my malice in my breath.
meeting two such wealsmen as you arei cannot call you lycurgusesif the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, i make a crooked face at it.
i can't say your worships have delivered the matter well, when i find the ass in and though i must be content to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you you have good faces.
if you see this in the map of my microcosm, follows it that i am known well enough too?
what barm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this character, if i be known well enough too?
come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
you know neither me, yourselves nor any thing.
you are ambitious for poor knaves' you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fossetseller and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a second day of audience.
when you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers set up the bloody flag against all patience and, in roaring for a chamberpot, dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties knaves.
you are a pair of strange ones.
come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter giber for the table than a necessary bencher in the capitol.
our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are.
when you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your beards and your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack saddle.
yet you must be saying, marcius is proud who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors since deucalion, though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary hangmen.
godden to more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly i will be bold to take my leave of you.
how now, my as fair as noble ladies,and the moon, were she earthly, no nobler,whither do you follow your eyes so fast?
honourable menenius, my boy marcius approaches for the love of juno, let's go.
marcius coming home!
ay, worthy menenius and with most prosperous approbation.
take my cap, jupiter, and i thank thee.
hoo!
marcius coming home!
nay,'tis true.
look, here' the state hath another, his wife another and, i think, there's one at home for you.
a letter for me!
yes, certain, there's a letter for you i saw't.
a letter for me!
it gives me an estate of seven years' health in which time i will make a lip at the most sovereign prescription in galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, of no better report than a horsedrench.
is he not wounded?
he was wont to come home wounded.
o, no, no, no.
o, he is wounded i thank the gods for't.
so do i too, brings a' victory in his pocket?
the wounds become him.
on' menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.
has he disciplined aufidius soundly?
titus lartius writes, they fought together, but aufidius got off.
and 'twas time for him too, i' an he had stayed by him, i would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in corioli, and the gold that's in them.
is the senate possessed of this?
good ladies, let's go.
yes, yes, yes the senate has letters from the general, wherein he gives my he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly in troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
wondrous!
ay, i warrant you, and not without his true purchasing.
the gods grant them true!
true!
pow, wow.
true!
i'll be sworn they are true.
where is he wounded?
god save your good worships!
marcius is coming he has more cause to be proud.
where is he wounded?
i' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall stand for his place.
he received in the repulse of tarquin seven hurts i' the body.
one i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,there's nine that i know.
he had, before this last expedition, twentyfive wounds upon him.
now it's twenty every gash was an enemy's grave.
hark!
the trumpets.
before him he carries noise, death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
know, rome, that all alone marcius did fight where he hath won, with fame, a name to caius marcius these in honour follows coriolanus.
welcome to rome, renowned coriolanus!
welcome to rome, renowned coriolanus!
no more of this pray now, no more.
look, sir, your mother!
o, you have, i know, petition'd all the gods for my prosperity!
nay, my good soldier, up my gentle marcius, worthy caius, and by deedachieving honour newly named, what is it?
coriolanus must i call thee?
but o, thy wife!
my gracious silence, hail!
wouldst thou have laugh'd had i come coffin'd home, that weep'st to see me triumph?
ay, my dear, such eyes the widows in corioli wear, and mothers that lack sons.
now, the gods crown thee!
and live you yet?
o my sweet lady, pardon.
o, and welcome, and ye're welcome all.
a hundred thousand welcomes.
i could weep and i could laugh, i am light and heavy.
welcome.
a curse begin at very root on's heart, that is not glad to see thee!
you are three yet, by the faith of men, we have some old crabtrees here at home that will not be grafted to your relish.
yet welcome, we call a nettle but a nettle and the faults of fools but folly.
ever right.
menenius ever, ever.
give way there, and go on!
i have lived to see inherited my very wishes only there's one thing wanting, which i doubt not but our rome will cast upon thee.
know, good mother, i had rather be their servant in my way, than sway with them in theirs.
on, to the capitol!
all tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights your prattling nurse into a rapture lets her baby cry the kitchen malkin pins her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, stalls, bulks, windows, are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed with variable complexions, all agreeing seldshown flamens do press among the popular throngs and puff or veil'd dames commit the war of white and damask in their nicelygawded cheeks to the wanton spoil of phoebus' such a pother as if that whatsoever god who leads him were slily crept into his human powers and gave him graceful posture.
on the sudden, i warrant him consul.
then our office may, during his power, go sleep.
he cannot temperately transport his honours from where he should begin and end, but will lose those he hath won.
in that there's comfort.
doubt not the commoners, for whom we stand, but they upon their ancient malice will forget with the least cause these his new honours, which that he will give them make i as little question as he is proud to do't.
i heard him swear, were he to stand for consul, never would he appear i' the marketplace nor on him put the napless vesture of humility nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds to the people, beg their stinking breaths.
'tis right.
o, he would miss it rather than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him, and the desire of the nobles.
i wish no better than have him hold that purpose and to put it in execution.
'tis most like he will.
it shall be to him then as our good wills, a sure destruction.
so it must fall out to him or our authorities.
for an end, we must suggest the people in what hatred he still hath held them that to's power he would have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, in human action and capacity, of no more soul nor fitness for the world than camels in the war, who have their provand only for bearing burdens, and sore blows for sinking under them.
this, as you say, suggested at some time when his soaring insolence shall touch the peoplewhich time shall not want, if he be put upon 't and that's as easy as to set dogs on sheepwill be his fire to kindle their dry stubble and their blaze shall darken him for ever.
what's the matter?
you are sent for to the capitol.
'tis thought i have seen the dumb men throng to see him and matrons flung gloves, ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, upon him as he pass' the nobles bended, as to jove's statue, and the commons made i never saw the like.
let's to the capitol and carry with us ears and eyes for the time, but hearts for the event.
have with you.
come, come, they are almost here.
how many stand for consulships?
three, but 'tis thought of every one coriolanus will carry it.
that's a brave fellow but he's vengeance proud, and loves not the common people.
faith, there had been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne'er loved them and there be many that they have loved, they know not so that, if they love they know not why, therefore, for coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition and out of his noble carelessness lets them plainly see't.
if he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than can render it him and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him their opposite.
now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
and his ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, having been supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further deed to have them at but he hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions in their hearts, that for their tongues to be silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ingrateful injury to report otherwise, were a malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
no more of him make way, they are coming.
having determined of the volsces and to send for titus lartius, it remains, as the main point of this our aftermeeting, to gratify his noble service that therefore, please you, most reverend and grave elders, to desire the present consul, and last general in our wellfound successes, to report a little of that worthy work perform'd by caius marcius coriolanus, whom we met here both to thank and to remember with honours like himself.
speak, leave nothing out for length, and make us think rather our state's defective for requital than we to stretch it out.
masters o' the people, we do request your kindest ears, and after, your loving motion toward the common body, to yield what passes here.
we are convented upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts inclinable to honour and advance the theme of our assembly.
which the rather we shall be blest to do, if he remember a kinder value of the people than he hath hereto prized them at.
that's off, that's off i would you rather had been silent.
please you to hear cominius speak?
most willingly but yet my caution was more pertinent than the rebuke you give it.
he loves your people but tie him not to be their bedfellow.
worthy cominius, speak.
nay, keep your place.
sit, coriolanus never shame to hear what you have nobly done.
your horror' i had rather have my wounds to heal again than hear say how i got them.
sir, i hope my words disbench'd you not.
no, yet oft, when blows have made me stay, i fled from words.
you soothed not, but your people, i love them as they weigh.
pray now, sit down.
i had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun when the alarum were struck than idly sit to hear my nothings monster'd.
masters of the people, your multiplying spawn how can he flatter that's thousand to one good onewhen you now see he had rather venture all his limbs for honour than one on's ears to hear it?
proceed, cominius.
the deeds of coriolanus should not be utter'd feebly.
it is held that valour is the chiefest virtue, and if it be, the man i speak of cannot in the world be singly counterpoised.
at sixteen years, when tarquin made a head for rome, he fought our then dictator, whom with all praise i point at, saw him fight, when with his amazonian chin he drove be bestrid an o'erpress'd roman and i' the consul's view tarquin's self he met, in that day's feats, when he might act the woman in the scene, he proved best man i' the field, and for his meed was browbound with the oak.
his pupil age manenter'd thus, he waxed like a sea, and in the brunt of seventeen battles since he lurch'd all swords of the garland.
for this last, before and in corioli, let me say, he stopp'd the fliers and by his rare example made the coward as weeds before a vessel under sail, so men obey'd his sword, death's stamp, where it did mark, it took from face to foot he was a thing of blood, whose every motion alone he enter'd the mortal gate of the city, which he painted with shunless destiny aidless came off, and with a sudden reinforcement struck now all' when, by and by, the din of war gan pierce his ready sense then straight his doubled spirit requicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, and to the battle came he where he did run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if ' and till we call'd both field and city ours, he never stood to ease his breast with panting.
worthy man!
he cannot but with measure fit the honours which we devise him.
our spoils he kick'd at, and look'd upon things precious as they were he covets less than misery itself would give rewards his deeds with doing them, and is content to spend the time to end it.
he' let him be call'd for.
call coriolanus.
he doth appear.
the senate, coriolanus, are well pleased to make thee consul.
i do owe them still my life and services.
it then remains that you do speak to the people.
i do beseech you, let me o'erleap that custom, for i cannot put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, for my wounds' sake, please you that i may pass this doing.
sir, the people must have their voices neither will they bate one jot of ceremony.
put them not to' pray you, go fit you to the custom and take to you, as your predecessors have, your honour with your form.
it is apart that i shall blush in acting, and might well be taken from the people.
mark you that?
to brag unto them, thus i did, and thus show them the unaching scars which i should hide, as if i had received them for the hire of their breath only!
do not stand upon't.
we recommend to you, tribunes of the people, and to our noble consul wish we all joy and honour.
to coriolanus come all joy and honour!
you see how he intends to use the people.
may they perceive's intent!
he will require them, as if he did contemn what he requested should be in them to give.
come, we'll inform them on the marketplace, i know, they do attend us.
once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.
we may, sir, if we will.
we have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do for if he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those wounds and speak for them so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them.
ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, of the which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
and to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the manyheaded multitude.
we have been called so of many not that our heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, and truly i think if all our wits were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south, and their consent of one direct way should be at once to all the points o' the compass.
think you so?
which way do you judge my wit would fly?
nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's will'tis strongly wedged up in a blockhead, but if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
why that way?
to lose itself in a fog, where being three parts melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
you may, you may.
are you all resolved to give your voices?
but that's no matter, the greater part carries it.
i say, if he would incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.
here he comes, mark his behavior.
we are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes.
he's to make his requests by particulars wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own therefore follow me, and i direct you how you shall go by him.
content, content.
o sir, have you not known the worthiest men have done't?
what must i say?
'i pray, sir'plague upon't!
i cannot bring 'look, sir, my wounds!
i got them in my country's service, when some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran from the noise of our own drums.
' o me, the gods!
you must desire them to think upon you.
think upon me!
hang 'em!
i would they would forget me, like the virtues which our divines lose by 'em.
you' i' pray you, speak to 'em, i pray you, in wholesome manner.
bid them wash their faces and keep their teeth clean.
so, here comes a brace.
you know the cause, air, of my standing here.
we do, sir tell us what hath brought you to't.
mine own desert.
your own desert!
ay, but not mine own desire.
how not your own desire?
no, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.
you must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to gain by you.
well then, i pray, your price o' the consulship?
the price is to ask it kindly.
kindly!
sir, i pray, let me ha' i have wounds to show you, which shall be yours in private.
your good voice, sir what say you?
you shall ha' it, worthy sir.
a match, sir.
there's in all two worthy voices begged.
adieu.
but this is something odd.
an 'twere to give again,but 'tis no matter.
pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that i may be consul, i have here the customary gown.
you have deserved nobly of your country, and you have not deserved nobly.
your enigma?
you have been a scourge to her enemies, you have been a rod to her friends you have not indeed loved the common people.
you should account me the more virtuous that i have not been common in my love.
i will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them 'tis a condition they account and since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my hat than my heart, i will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly that is, sir, i will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man and give it bountiful to the desirers.
therefore, beseech you, i may be consul.
we hope to find you our friend and therefore give you our voices heartily.
you have received many wounds for your country.
i will not seal your knowledge with showing them.
i will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
the gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
most sweet voices!
better it is to die, better to starve, than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
why in this woolvish toge should i stand here, to beg of hob and dick, that do appear, their needless vouches?
custom calls me to' what custom wills, in all things should we do't, the dust on antique time would lie unswept, and mountainous error be too highly heapt for truth to o'erpeer.
rather than fool it so, let the high office and the honour go to one that would do thus.
i am half through the one part suffer'd, the other will i do.
here come more voices.
for your voices i have fought watch'd for your voices for your voices bear of wounds two dozen odd battles thrice six i have seen and heard of for your voices have done many things, some less, indeed i would be consul.
he has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man's voice.
the gods give him joy, and make him good friend to the people!
amen, amen.
god save thee, noble consul!
worthy voices!
you have stood your limitation and the tribunes endue you with the people' remains that, in the official marks invested, you anon do meet the senate.
is this done?
the people do admit you, and are summon'd to meet anon, upon your approbation.
where?
at the senatehouse?
there, coriolanus.
may i change these garments?
you may, sir.
that i'll straight do and, knowing myself again, repair to the senatehouse.
i'll keep you company.
will you along?
we stay here for the people.
fare you well.
he has it now, and by his looks methink 'tis warm at 's heart.
with a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?
how now, my masters!
have you chose this man?
he has our voices, sir.
we pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
amen, to my poor unworthy notice, he mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.
certainly he flouted us downright.
no,' he did not mock us.
not one amongst us, save yourself, but says he should have show'd us his marks of merit, wounds received for's country.
why, so he did, i am sure.
no, no no man saw 'em.
he said he had wounds, which he could show in private and with his hat, thus waving it in scorn, 'i would be consul,' 'aged custom, but by your voices, will not so permit me your voices therefore.
' when we granted that, here was ' now you have left your voices, i have no further with you.
' was not this mockery?
why either were you ignorant to see't, or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness to yield your voices?
could you not have told him as you were lesson'd, when he had no power, but was a petty servant to the state, he was your enemy, ever spake against your liberties and the charters that you bear i' the body of the weal and now, arriving a place of potency and sway o' the state, if he should still malignantly remain fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might be curses to yourselves?
you should have said that as his worthy deeds did claim no less than what he stood for, so his gracious nature would think upon you for your voices and translate his malice towards you into love, standing your friendly lord.
thus to have said, as you were foreadvised, had touch'd his spirit and tried his inclination from him pluck'd either his gracious promise, which you might, as cause had call'd you up, have held him to or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, which easily endures not article tying him to aught so putting him to rage, you should have ta'en the advantage of his choler and pass'd him unelected.
did you perceive he did solicit you in free contempt when he did need your loves, and do you think that his contempt shall not be bruising to you, when he hath power to crush?
why, had your bodies no heart among you?
or had you tongues to cry against the rectorship of judgment?
have you ere now denied the asker?
and now again of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow your suedfor tongues?
he's not confirm'd we may deny him yet.
i'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
i twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.
get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, they have chose a consul that will from them take their liberties make them of no more voice than dogs that are as often beat for barking as therefore kept to do so.
let them assemble, and on a safer judgment all revoke your ignorant election enforce his pride, and his old hate unto you besides, forget not with what contempt he wore the humble weed, how in his suit he scorn'd you but your loves, thinking upon his services, took from you the apprehension of his present portance, which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion after the inveterate hate he bears you.
lay a fault on us, your tribunes that we laboured, no impediment between, but that you must cast your election on him.
say, you chose him more after our commandment than as guided by your own true affections, and that your minds, preoccupied with what you rather must do than what you should, made you against the grain lay the fault on us.
ay, spare us not.
say we read lectures to you.
how youngly he began to serve his country, how long continued, and what stock he springs of, the noble house o' the marcians, from whence came that ancus marcius, numa's daughter's son, who, after great hostilius, here was king of the same house publius and quintus were, that our beat water brought by conduits hither and twice being was his great ancestor.
one thus descended, that hath beside well in his person wrought to be set high in place, we did commend but you have found, scaling his present bearing with his past, that he's your fixed enemy, and revoke your sudden approbation.
say, you ne'er had done't harp on that stillbut by our putting on and presently, when you have drawn your number, repair to the capitol.
almost all repent in their election.
let them go on this mutiny were better put in hazard, than stay, past doubt, if, as his nature is, he fall in rage with their refusal, both observe and answer the vantage of his anger.
to the capitol, we will be there before the stream o' the people and this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own, which we have goaded onward.
tullus aufidius then had made new head?
he had, my lord and that it was which caused our swifter composition.
so then the volsces stand but as at first, ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
upon's again.
they are worn, lord consul, so, that we shall hardly in our ages see their banners wave again.
saw you aufidius?
on safeguard he came to me and did curse against the volsces, for they had so vilely he is retired to antium.
spoke he of me?
he did, my lord.
how?
what?
how often he had met you, sword to sword that of all things upon the earth he hated your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes to hopeless restitution, so he might be call'd your vanquisher.
at antium lives he?
at antium.
i wish i had a cause to seek him there, to oppose his hatred fully.
welcome home.
behold, these are the tribunes of the people, the tongues o' i do despise them for they do prank them in authority, against all noble sufferance.
pass no further.
what is that?
no further.
what makes this change?
the matter?
hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
cominius, no.
have i had children's voices?
tribunes, give way he shall to the marketplace.
the people are incensed against him.
stop, or all will fall in broil.
are these your herd?
must these have voices, that can yield them now and straight disclaim their tongues?
what are your offices?
you being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
have you not set them on?
be calm, be calm.
it is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule nor ever will be ruled.
call' the people cry you mock'd them, and of late, when corn was given them gratis, you repined scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them timepleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
why, this was known before.
not to them all.
have you inform'd them sithence?
how!
i inform them!
you are like to do such business.
not unlike, each way, to better yours.
why then should i be consul?
by yond clouds, let me deserve so ill as you, and make me your fellow tribune.
you show too much of that if you will pass to where you are bound, you must inquire your way, which you are out of, with a gentler spirit, or never be so noble as a consul, nor yoke with him for tribune.
let's be calm.
the people are abused set on.
this paltering becomes not rome, nor has coriolanus deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely i' the plain way of his merit.
tell me of corn!
this was my speech, and i will speak't again not now, not now.
not in this heat, sir, now.
now, as i live, i will.
my nobler friends, for the mutable, rankscented many, let them regard me as i do not flatter, and i say again, in soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition, which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd, and scatter'd, by mingling them with us, the honour'd number, who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that which they have given to beggars.
well, no more.
no more words, we beseech you.
how!
no more!
as for my country i have shed my blood, not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs coin words till their decay against those measles, which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought the very way to catch them.
you speak o' the people, as if you were a god to punish, not a man of their infirmity.
'twere well we let the people know't.
what, what?
his choler?
choler!
were i as patient as the midnight sleep, by jove, 'twould be my mind!
it is a mind that shall remain a poison where it is, not poison any further.
shall remain!
hear you this triton of the minnows?
mark you his absolute 'shall'?
'twas from the canon.
'shall'!
o good but most unwise patricians!
why, you grave but reckless senators, have you thus given hydra here to choose an officer, that with his peremptory 'shall,' being but the horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit to say he'll turn your current in a ditch, and make your channel his?
if he have power then vail your ignorance if none, awake your dangerous lenity.
if you are learn'd, be not as common fools if you are not, let them have cushions by you.
you are plebeians, and they are no less, when, both your voices blended, the great'st taste most palates theirs.
they choose their magistrate, and such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' his popular 'shall' against a graver bench than ever frown in greece.
by jove himself!
and my soul aches to know, when two authorities are up, neither supreme, how soon confusion may enter 'twixt the gap of both and take the one by the other.
well, on to the marketplace.
whoever gave that counsel, to give forth the corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used sometime in greece, well, well, no more of that.
though there the people had more absolute power, i say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed the ruin of the state.
why, shall the people give one that speaks thus their voice?
i'll give my reasons, more worthier than their voices.
they know the corn was not our recompense, resting well assured that ne'er did service for' being press'd to the war, even when the navel of the state was touch'd, they would not thread the gates.
this kind of service did not deserve corn gratis.
being i' the war their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd most valour, the accusation which they have often made against the senate, all cause unborn, could never be the motive of our so frank donation.
well, what then?
how shall this bisson multitude digest the senate's courtesy?
let deeds express what' 'we did request it we are the greater poll, and in true fear they gave us our demands.
' thus we debase the nature of our seats and make the rabble call our cares fears which will in time break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in the crows to peck the eagles.
come, enough.
enough, with overmeasure.
no, what may be sworn by, both divine and human, seal what i end withal!
this double worship, where one part does disdain with cause, the other insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom, cannot conclude but by the yea and no of general ignorance,it must omit real necessities, and give way the while purpose so barr'd, it follows, nothing is done to purpose.
therefore, beseech you, you that will be less fearful than discreet, that love the fundamental part of state more than you doubt the change on't, that prefer a noble life before a long, and wish to jump a body with a dangerous physic that's sure of death without it, at once pluck out the multitudinous tongue let them not lick your dishonour mangles true judgment and bereaves the state of that integrity which should become't, not having the power to do the good it would, for the in which doth control't.
has said enough.
has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer as traitors do.
thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
what should the people do with these bald tribunes?
on whom depending, their obedience fails in a rebellion, when what's not meet, but what must be, was law, in a better hour, let what is meet be said it must be meet, and throw their power i' the dust.
manifest treason!
this a consul?
the aediles, ho!
let him be apprehended.
go, in whose name myself attach thee as a traitorous innovator, obey, i charge thee, and follow to thine answer.
hence, old goat!
senators, we'll surety him.
aged sir, hands off.
hence, rotten thing!
or i shall shake thy bones out of thy garments.
help, ye citizens!
on both sides more respect.
here's he that would take from you all your power.
seize him, aediles!
down with him!
down with him!
senators, weapons, weapons, weapons!
'tribunes!
' 'patricians!
' 'citizens!
' 'what, ho!
' 'sicinius!
' 'brutus!
' 'coriolanus!
' 'citizens!
' 'peace, peace, peace!
' 'stay, hold, peace!
' what is about to be?
i am out of breath confusion's near i cannot speak.
you, tribunes to the people!
coriolanus, patience!
speak, good sicinius.
hear me, people peace!
let' peace speak, speak, speak.
marcius would have all from you marcius, whom late you have named for consul.
fie, fie, fie!
this is the way to kindle, not to quench.
to unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
what is the city but the people?
true, the people are the city.
by the consent of all, we were establish'd the people's magistrates.
you so remain.
and so are like to do.
that is the way to lay the city flat to bring the roof to the foundation, and bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, in heaps and piles of ruin.
this deserves death.
or let us stand to our authority, or let us lose it.
we do here pronounce, upon the part o' the people, in whose power we were elected theirs, marcius is worthy of present death.
therefore lay hold of him bear him to the rock tarpeian, and from thence into destruction cast him.
aediles, seize him!
yield, marcius, yield!
hear me one word beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
peace, peace!
sir, those cold ways, that seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous where the disease is violent.
lay hands upon him, and bear him to the rock.
no, i'll die here.
there' come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
down with that sword!
tribunes, withdraw awhile.
lay hands upon him.
help marcius, help, you that be noble help him, young and old!
down with him, down with him!
go, get you to your house be gone, away!
all will be naught else.
get you gone.
stand fast we have as many friends as enemies.
sham it be put to that?
the gods forbid!
i prithee, noble friend, home to thy house leave us to cure this cause.
for 'tis a sore upon us, be gone, beseech you.
come, sir, along with us.
i would they were barbariansas they are, though in rome litter'dnot romansas they are not, though calved i' the porch o' the capitol be gone put not your worthy rage into your tongue one time will owe another.
on fair ground i could beat forty of them.
i could myself take up a brace o' the best of them yea, the but now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic and manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands against a falling fabric.
will you hence, before the tag return?
whose rage doth rend like interrupted waters and o'erbear what they are used to bear.
pray you, i'll try whether my old wit be in request this must be patch'd with cloth of any colour.
nay, come away.
this man has marr'd his fortune.
he would not flatter neptune for his trident, or jove for's power to thunder.
his heart' what his breast forges, that his tongue must vent and, being angry, does forget that ever he heard the name of death.
here's goodly work!
i would they were abed!
i would they were in tiber!
what the vengeance!
could he not speak 'em fair?
where is this viper that would depopulate the city and be every man himself?
you worthy tribunes, he shall be thrown down the tarpeian rock he hath resisted law, and therefore law shall scorn him further trial than the severity of the public power which he so sets at nought.
he shall well know the noble tribunes are the people's mouths, and we their hands.
he shall, sure on't.
sir, sir, peace!
do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt with modest warrant.
sir, how comes't that you have holp to make this rescue?
as i do know the consul's worthiness, so can i name his faults, consul!
what consul?
the consul coriolanus.
he consul!
no, no, no, no, no.
if, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, i may be heard, i would crave a word or two the which shall turn you to no further harm than so much loss of time.
speak briefly then for we are peremptory to dispatch to eject him hence were but one danger, and to keep him here therefore it is decreed he dies tonight.
now the good gods forbid that our renowned rome, whose gratitude towards her deserved children is enroll'd in jove's own book, like an unnatural dam should now eat up her own!
he's a disease that must be cut away.
o, he's a limb that has but a disease mortal, to cut it off to cure it, easy.
what has he done to rome that's worthy death?
killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost which, i dare vouch, is more than that he hath, by many an ouncehe dropp'd it for his country and what is left, to lose it by his country, were to us all, that do't and suffer it, a brand to the end o' the world.
this is clean kam.
when he did love his country, it honour'd him.
the service of the foot being once gangrened, is not then respected for what before it was.
we'll hear no more.
pursue him to his house, lest his infection, being of catching nature, spread further.
one word more, one word.
this tigerfooted rage, when it shall find the harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late tie leaden pounds to's heels.
proceed by process lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, and sack great rome with romans.
if it were so, what do ye talk?
have we not had a taste of his obedience?
our aediles smote?
ourselves resisted?
come.
he has been bred i' the wars since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd in bolted language meal and bran together he throws without distinction.
give me leave, i'll go to him, and undertake to bring him where he shall answer, by a lawful form, in peace, to his utmost peril.
noble tribunes, the other course will prove too bloody, and the end of it unknown to the beginning.
noble menenius, be you then as the people's officer.
masters, lay down your weapons.
go not home.
meet on the marketplace.
we' where, if you bring not marcius, we'll proceed in our first way.
i'll bring him to you.
he must come, or what is worst will follow.
pray you, let's to him.
let them puff all about mine ears, present me death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels, or pile ten hills on the tarpeian rock, that the precipitation might down stretch below the beam of sight, yet will i still be thus to them.
you do the nobler.
i muse my mother does not approve me further, who was wont to call them woollen vassals, things created to buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads in congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder, when one but of my ordinance stood up to speak of peace or war.
why did you wish me milder?
would you have me false to my nature?
rather say i play the man i am.
o, sir, sir, sir, i would have had you put your power well on, before you had worn it out.
let go.
you might have been enough the man you are, with striving less to be so lesser had been the thwartings of your dispositions, if you had not show'd them how ye were disposed ere they lack'd power to cross you.
let them hang.
ay, and burn too.
come, come, you have been too rough, something too rough you must return and mend it.
there's no remedy unless, by not so doing, our good city cleave in the midst, and perish.
pray, be counsell' i have a heart as little apt as yours, but yet a brain that leads my use of anger to better vantage.
well said, noble woman?
before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that the violent fit o' the time craves it as physic for the whole state, i would put mine armour on, which i can scarcely bear.
what must i do?
return to the tribunes.
well, what then?
what then?
repent what you have spoke.
for them!
i cannot do it to the gods must i then do't to them?
you are too absolute though therein you can never be too noble, but when extremities speak.
i have heard you say, honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, i' grant that, and tell me, in peace what each of them by the other lose, that they combine not there.
tush, tush!
a good demand.
if it be honour in your wars to seem the same you are not, which, for your best ends, you adopt your policy, how is it less or worse, that it shall hold companionship in peace with honour, as in war, since that to both it stands in like request?
why force you this?
because that now it lies you on to speak to the people not by your own instruction, nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, but with such words that are but rooted in your tongue, though but bastards and syllables of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
now, this no more dishonours you at all than to take in a town with gentle words, which else would put you to your fortune and the hazard of much blood.
i would dissemble with my nature where my fortunes and my friends at stake required i am in this, your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles and you will rather show our general louts how you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em, for the inheritance of their loves and safeguard of what that want might ruin.
noble lady!
come, go with us you may salve so, not what is dangerous present, but the loss of what is past.
i prithee now, my son, go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand and thus far having stretch'd ithere be with them thy knee bussing the stonesfor in such business action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant more learned than the earswaving thy head, which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart, now humble as the ripest mulberry or say to them, thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess, were fit for thee to use as they to claim, in asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far as thou hast power and person.
this but done, even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours for they have pardons, being ask'd, as free as words to little purpose.
prithee now, go, although i know thou hadst rather follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf than flatter him in a bower.
here is cominius.
i have been i' the marketplace and, sir,'tis fit you make strong party, or defend yourself all's in anger.
only fair speech.
i think 'twill serve, if he can thereto frame his spirit.
he must, and will prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
must i go show them my unbarbed sconce?
must i with base tongue give my noble heart a lie that it must bear?
well, i will do' yet, were there but this single plot to lose, this mould of marcius, they to dust should grind it and throw't against the wind.
to the marketplace!
you have put me now to such a part which never i shall discharge to the life.
come, come, we'll prompt you.
i prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said my praises made thee first a soldier, so, to have my praise for this, perform a part thou hast not done before.
well, i must do' away, my disposition, and possess me some harlot's spirit!
my throat of war be turn'd, which quired with my drum, into a pipe small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice that babies lulls asleep!
the smiles of knaves tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up the glasses of my sight!
a beggar's tongue make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees, who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his that hath received an alms!
i will not do't, lest i surcease to honour mine own truth and by my body's action teach my mind a most inherent baseness.
at thy choice, to beg of thee, it is my more dishonour than thou of them.
come all to ruin let thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear thy dangerous stoutness, for i mock at death with as big heart as thou.
do as thou list thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, but owe thy pride thyself.
pray, mother, i am going to the marketplace chide me no more.
i'll mountebank their loves, cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved of all the trades in rome.
look, commend me to my wife.
i'll return consul or never trust to what my tongue can do i' the way of flattery further.
do your will.
away!
arm yourself to answer mildly for they are prepared with accusations, as i hear, more strong than are upon you yet.
the word is 'mildly.
' pray you, let them accuse me by invention, i will answer in mine honour.
ay, but mildly.
well, mildly be it then.
mildly!
in this point charge him home, that he affects if he evade us there, enforce him with his envy to the people, and that the spoil got on the antiates was ne'er distributed.
what, will he come?
he's coming.
how accompanied?
with old menenius, and those senators that always favour'd him.
have you a catalogue of all the voices that we have procured set down by the poll?
i have 'tis ready.
have you collected them by tribes?
i have.
assemble presently the people hither and when they bear me say 'it shall be so i' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either for death, for fine, or banishment, then let them if i say fine, cry 'fine' if death, cry 'death.
' insisting on the old prerogative and power i' the truth o' the cause.
i shall inform them.
and when such time they have begun to cry, let them not cease, but with a din confused enforce the present execution of what we chance to sentence.
very well.
make them be strong and ready for this hint, when we shall hap to give 't them.
go about it.
he hath been used ever to conquer, and to have his worth being once chafed, he cannot be rein'd again to temperance then he speaks what's in his heart and that is there which looks with us to break his neck.
well, here he comes.
calmly, i do beseech you.
ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece will bear the knave by the volume.
the honour'd gods keep rome in safety, and the chairs of justice supplied with worthy men!
plant love among 's!
throng our large temples with the shows of peace, and not our streets with war!
amen, amen.
a noble wish.
draw near, ye people.
list to your tribunes.
peace, i say!
first, hear me speak.
well, say.
peace, ho!
shall i be charged no further than this present?
must all determine here?
i do demand, if you submit you to the people's voices, allow their officers and are content to suffer lawful censure for such faults as shall be proved upon you?
i am content.
lo, citizens, the warlike service he has done, consider think upon the wounds his body bears, which show like graves i' the holy churchyard.
scratches with briers, scars to move laughter only.
consider further, that when he speaks not like a citizen, do not take his rougher accents for malicious sounds, but, as i say, such as become a soldier, rather than envy you.
well, well, no more.
what is the matter that being pass'd for consul with full voice, i am so dishonour'd that the very hour you take it off again?
answer to us.
say, 'tis true, i ought so.
we charge you, that you have contrived to take from rome all season'd office and to wind yourself into a power tyrannical for which you are a traitor to the people.
how!
traitor!
nay, temperately your promise.
the fires i' the lowest hell foldin the people!
call me their traitor!
thou injurious tribune!
within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, in thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in thy lying tongue both numbers, i would say 'thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free as i do pray the gods.
mark you this, people?
to the rock, to the rock with him!
peace!
what you have seen him do and heard him speak, beating your officers, cursing yourselves, opposing laws with strokes and here defying those whose great power must try him even this, so criminal and in such capital kind, deserves the extremest death.
but since he hath served well for rome, what do you prate of service?
i talk of that, that know it.
you?
is this the promise that you made your mother?
know, i pray you, let them pronounce the steep tarpeian death, vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger but with a grain a day, i would not buy their mercy at the price of one fair word nor cheque my courage for what they can give, to have't with saying 'good morrow.
' for that he has, as much as in him lies, from time to time envied against the people, seeking means to pluck away their power, as now at last given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence of dreaded justice, but on the ministers that do distribute it in the name o' the people and in the power of us the tribunes, we, even from this instant, banish him our city, in peril of precipitation from off the rock tarpeian never more i' the people's name, i say it shall be so.
it shall be so, it shall be so he's banish'd, and it shall be so.
hear me, my masters, and my common friends, he's sentenced no more hearing.
i have been consul, and can show for rome her enemies' marks upon me.
i do love my country's good with a respect more tender, more holy and profound, than mine own life, my dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase, and treasure of my loins then if i would speak that, speak what?
there's no more to be said, but he is banish'd, it shall be so.
it shall be so, it shall be so.
you common cry of curs!
whose breath i hate as reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves i prize as the dead carcasses of unburied men that do corrupt my air, i banish you and here remain with your uncertainty!
let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, fan you into despair!
have the power still to banish your defenders till at length your ignorance, which finds not till it feels, making not reservation of yourselves, still your own foes, deliver you as most abated captives to some nation that won you without blows!
despising, for you, the city, there is a world elsewhere.
the people's enemy is gone, is gone!
our enemy is banish'd!
he is gone!
hoo!
hoo!
go, see him out at gates, and follow him, as he hath followed you, with all despite give him deserved vexation.
let a guard attend us through the city.
come, come let's see him out at gates come.
the gods preserve our noble tribunes!
come.
come, the beast with many heads butts me away.
nay, mother, where is your ancient courage?
you were used to say extremity was the trier of spirits that common chances common men could bear that when the sea was calm all boats alike show'd mastership in floating fortune's blows, when most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves you were used to load me with precepts that would make invincible the heart that conn'd them.
o heavens!
o heavens!
nay!
prithee, woman, now the red pestilence strike all trades in rome, and occupations perish!
what, what, what!
i shall be loved when i am lack'd.
nay, mother.
resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, if you had been the wife of hercules, six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved your husband so much sweat.
cominius, droop not adieu.
farewell, my wife, i'll do well yet.
thou old and true menenius, thy tears are salter than a younger man's, and venomous to thine eyes.
my sometime general, i have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld hearthardening spectacles tell these sad women 'tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, as 'tis to laugh at 'em.
my mother, you wot well and believe't not lightlythough i go alone, like to a lonely dragon, that his fen makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seenyour son will or exceed the common or be caught with cautelous baits and practise.
my first son.
whither wilt thou go?
take good cominius determine on some course, more than a wild exposture to each chance that starts i' the way before thee.
o the gods!
i'll follow thee a month, devise with thee where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us so if the time thrust forth a cause for thy repeal, we shall not send o'er the vast world to seek a single man, and lose advantage, which doth ever cool i' the absence of the needer.
thou hast years upon thee and thou art too full of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one that' bring me but out at gate.
come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and my friends of noble touch, when i am forth, bid me farewell, and smile.
i pray you, come.
while i remain above the ground, you shall hear from me still, and never of me aught but what is like me formerly.
that's worthily as any ear can hear.
come, let's not weep.
if i could shake off but one seven years from these old arms and legs, by the good gods, i'ld with thee every foot.
come.
bid them all home he's gone, and we'll no further.
the nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided in his behalf.
now we have shown our power, let us seem humbler after it is done than when it was adoing.
say their great enemy is gone, and they stand in their ancient strength.
dismiss them home.
here comes his mother.
let's not meet her.
why?
they say she's mad.
they have ta' keep on your way.
o, ye' the hoarded plague o' the gods requite your love!
peace, peace be not so loud.
if that i could for weeping, you should hear, nay, and you shall hear some.
will you be gone?
are you mankind?
ay, fool is that a shame?
note but this fool.
was not a man my father?
hadst thou foxship to banish him that struck more blows for rome than thou hast spoken words?
o blessed heavens!
more noble blows than ever thou wise words and for rome's good.
i'll tell thee what nay, i would my son were in arabia, and thy tribe before him, his good sword in his hand.
what then?
what then!
he'ld make an end of thy posterity.
bastards and all.
good man, the wounds that he does bear for rome!
come, come, peace.
i would he had continued to his country as he began, and not unknit himself the noble knot he made.
i would he had.
'i would he had'!
' cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth as i can of those mysteries which heaven will not have earth to know.
pray, let us go.
now, pray, sir, you have done a brave deed.
ere you go, as far as doth the capitol exceed the meanest house in rome, so far my son this lady's husband here, this, do you see whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.
well, well, we'll leave you.
why stay we to be baited with one that wants her wits?
take my prayers with you.
i would the gods had nothing else to do but to confirm my curses!
could i meet 'em but once aday, it would unclog my heart of what lies heavy to't.
you have told them home and, by my troth, you have cause.
you'll sup with me?
anger's my meat i sup upon myself, and so shall starve with feeding.
come, let' leave this faint puling and lament as i do, in anger, junolike.
come, come, come.
fie, fie, fie!
i know you well, sir, and you know your name, i think, is adrian.
it is so, truly, i have forgot you.
i am a roman and my services are, as you are, against ' know you me yet?
nicanor?
the same, sir.
you had more beard when i last saw you but your favour is well approved by your tongue.
what's the news in rome?
i have a note from the volscian state, you have well saved me a day's journey.
there hath been in rome strange insurrections the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
hath been!
is it ended, then?
our state thinks not they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
the main blaze of it is past, but a small thing for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment of that worthy coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever.
this lies glowing, i can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking out.
coriolanus banished!
banished, sir.
you will be welcome with this intelligence, nicanor.
the day serves well for them now.
i have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she's fallen out with her husband.
your noble tullus aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.
he cannot choose.
i am most fortunate, thus you have ended my business, and i will merrily accompany you home.
i shall, between this and supper, tell you most strange things from rome all tending to the good of their adversaries.
have you an army ready, say you?
a most royal one the centurions and their charges, distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
i am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man, i think, that shall set them in present action.
so, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
you take my part from me, sir i have the most cause to be glad of yours.
well, let us go together.
a goodly city is this antium.
city, ' many an heir of these fair edifices 'fore my wars then know me not, lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones in puny battle slay me.
save you, sir.
and you.
direct me, if it be your will, is he in antium?
he is, and feasts the nobles of the state at his house this night.
which is his house, beseech you?
this, here before you.
thank you, farewell.
o world, thy slippery turns!
friends now fast sworn, whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise, are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love unseparable, shall within this hour, on a dissension of a doit, break out so, fellest foes, whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep, to take the one the other, by some chance, some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends and interjoin their issues.
my birthplace hate i, and my love's upon this enemy town.
i' if he slay me, he does fair justice if he give me way, i'll do his country service.
wine, wine, wine!
what service is here!
i think our fellows are asleep.
where's cotus?
my master calls for him.
cotus!
the feast smells well but i appear not like a guest.
what would you have, friend?
whence are you?
here' pray, go to the door.
i have deserved no better entertainment, in being coriolanus.
whence are you, sir?
has the porter his eyes in his head that he gives entrance to such companions?
pray, get you out.
away!
away!
get you away.
now thou'rt troublesome.
are you so brave?
i'll have you talked with anon.
what fellow's this?
i cannot get him prithee, call my master to him.
what have you to do here, fellow?
pray you, avoid the house.
let me but stand i will not hurt your hearth.
what are you?
a gentleman.
a marvellous poor one.
true, so i am.
pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station here's no place for you pray you, come.
follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
what, you will not?
prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has here.
and i shall.
where dwellest thou?
under the canopy.
under the canopy!
where's that?
i' the city of kites and crows.
i' the city of kites and crows!
what an ass it is!
then thou dwellest with daws too?
no, i serve not thy master.
how, sir!
do you meddle with my master?
ay 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy mistress.
thou pratest, and pratest serve with thy trencher, hence!
where is this fellow?
here, i'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.
whence comest thou?
what wouldst thou?
thy name?
why speak'st not?
speak, what's thy name?
if, tullus, not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not think me for the man i am, necessity commands me name myself.
what is thy name?
a name unmusical to the volscians' ears, and harsh in sound to thine.
say, what's thy name?
thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face bears a command in't though thy tackle's torn.
thou show' what's thy name?
know'st thou me yet?
thy name?
my name is caius marcius, who hath done to thee particularly and to all the volsces great hurt and mischief thereto witness may my surname, the painful service, the extreme dangers and the drops of blood shed for my thankless country are requited but with that surname a good memory, and witness of the malice and displeasure only that name remains the cruelty and envy of the people, permitted by our dastard nobles, who have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest and suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be whoop'd out of rome.
now this extremity hath brought me to thy hearth not out of hope mistake me notto save my life, for if i had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world i would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite, to be full quit of those my banishers, stand i before thee here.
then if thou hast a heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight, so use it that my revengeful services may prove as benefits to thee, for i will fight against my canker'd country with the spleen of all the under fiends.
but if so be thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes thou'rt tired, then, in a word, i also am longer to live most weary, and present my throat to thee and to thy ancient malice which not to cut would show thee but a fool, since i have ever follow'd thee with hate, drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast, and cannot live but to thy shame, unless it be to do thee service.
o marcius, marcius!
each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart a root of ancient envy.
if jupiter should from yond cloud speak divine things, and say 'tis true,' i'ld not believe them more than thee, all noble marcius.
let me twine mine arms about that body, where against my grained ash an hundred times hath broke and scarr' here i clip the anvil of my sword, and do contest as hotly and as nobly with thy love as ever in ambitious strength i did contend against thy valour.
know thou first, i loved the maid i married never man sigh'd truer breath but that i see thee here, thou noble thing!
more dances my rapt heart than when i first my wedded mistress saw bestride my threshold.
why, thou mars!
i tell thee, we have a power on foot and i had purpose once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, thou hast beat me out twelve several times, and i have nightly since dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me we have been down together in my sleep, unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat, and waked half dead with nothing.
worthy marcius, had we no quarrel else to rome, but that thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all from twelve to seventy, and pouring war into the bowels of ungrateful rome, like a bold flood o'erbear.
o, come, go in, and take our friendly senators by the hands who now are here, taking their leaves of me, who am prepared against your territories, though not for rome itself.
you bless me, gods!
therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have the leading of thine own revenges, take the one half of my commission and set down as best thou art experienced, since thou know'st thy country's strength and weakness,thine own ways whether to knock against the gates of rome, or rudely visit them in parts remote, to fright them, ere destroy.
let me commend thee first to those that shall say yea to thy desires.
a thousand welcomes!
and more a friend than e'er an enemy yet, marcius, that was much.
most welcome!
here's a strange alteration!
by my hand, i had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a false report of him.
what an arm he has!
he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
nay, i knew by his face that there was something in he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,i cannot tell how to term it.
he had so looking as it werewould i were hanged, but i thought there was more in him than i could think.
so did i, i' he is simply the rarest man i' the world.
but a greater soldier than he you wot on.
who, my master?
nay, it's no matter for that.
worth six on him.
nay, but i take him to be the greater soldier.
faith, look you, for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
ay, and for an assault too.
o slaves, i can tell you news, news, you rascals!
what, what, what?
let's partake.
i would not be a roman, of all nations i had as lieve be a condemned man.
wherefore?
wherefore?
why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general, caius marcius.
why do you say 'thwack our general '?
i do not say 'thwack our general' but he was always good enough for him.
come, he was ever too hard for him i have heard him say so himself.
he was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on' before corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.
an he had been cannibally given, he might have broiled and eaten him too.
but, more of thy news?
why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son and heir to mars set at upper end o' the table no question asked him by any of the senators, but they our general himself makes a sanctifies himself with's hand and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse.
but the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was yesterday for the other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table.
he'll go, he says, he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
and he's as like to do't as any man i can imagine.
do't!
he will do't for, look you, sir, he has as many friends as enemies which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
directitude!
what's that?
but when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.
but when goes this forward?
tomorrow today presently you shall have the 'tis, as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
this peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed balladmakers.
let me have war, say i it exceeds peace as far as day does night it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent.
peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible a getter of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
' and as war, in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.
ay, and it makes men hate one another.
reason because they then less need one another.
the wars for my money.
i hope to see romans as cheap as volscians.
they are rising, they are rising.
in, in, in, in!
we hear not of him, neither need we fear him his remedies are tame i' the present peace and quietness of the people, which before were in wild hurry.
here do we make his friends blush that the world goes well, who rather had, though they themselves did suffer by't, behold dissentious numbers pestering streets than see our tradesmen with in their shops and going about their functions friendly.
we stood to't in good time.
is this menenius?
'tis he,' o, he is grown most kind of late.
hail sir!
hail to you both!
your coriolanus is not much miss'd, the commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, were he more angry at it.
all's well and might have been much better, if he could have temporized.
where is he, hear you?
nay, his mother and his wife hear nothing from him.
the gods preserve you both!
godden, our neighbours.
godden to you all, godden to you all.
ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, are bound to pray for you both.
live, and thrive!
farewell, we wish'd coriolanus had loved you as we did.
now the gods keep you!
farewell, farewell.
this is a happier and more comely time than when these fellows ran about the streets, crying confusion.
caius marcius was a worthy officer i' the war but insolent, o'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, selfloving, and affecting one sole throne, without assistance.
i think not so.
we should by this, to all our lamentation, if he had gone forth consul, found it so.
the gods have well prevented it, and rome sits safe and still without him.
worthy tribunes, there is a slave, whom we have put in prison, reports, the volsces with two several powers are enter'd in the roman territories, and with the deepest malice of the war destroy what lies before 'em.
'tis aufidius, who, hearing of our marcius' banishment, thrusts forth his horns again into the world which were inshell'd when marcius stood for rome, and durst not once peep out.
come, what talk you of marcius?
go see this rumourer whipp'd.
it cannot be the volsces dare break with us.
cannot be!
we have record that very well it can, and three examples of the like have been within my age.
but reason with the fellow, before you punish him, where he heard this, lest you shall chance to whip your information and beat the messenger who bids beware of what is to be dreaded.
i know this cannot be.
not possible.
the nobles in great earnestness are going all to the senate some news is come that turns their countenances.
'tis this slave go whip him, 'fore the people'his raising nothing but his report.
yes, worthy sir, the slave's report is seconded and more, more fearful, is deliver'd.
what more fearful?
it is spoke freely out of many mouths how probable i do not knowthat marcius, join'd with aufidius, leads a power 'gainst rome, and vows revenge as spacious as between the young'st and oldest thing.
this is most likely!
raised only, that the weaker sort may wish good marcius home again.
the very trick on't.
he and aufidius can no more atone than violentest contrariety.
a fearful army, led by caius marcius associated with aufidius, rages upon our territories and have already o'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took what lay before them.
o, you have made good work!
what news?
what news?
you have holp to ravish your own daughters and to melt the city leads upon your pates, to see your wives dishonour'd to your noses, what's the news?
what's the news?
your temples burned in their cement, and your franchises, whereon you stood, confined into an auger's bore.
pray now, your news?
you have made fair work, i fear me.
pray, your news?
if marcius should be join'd with volscians, if!
he leads them like a thing made by some other deity than nature, that shapes man better and they follow him, against us brats, with no less confidence than boys pursuing summer butterflies, or butchers killing flies.
you have made good work, you and your apronmen you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and the breath of garliceaters!
he will shake your rome about your ears.
as hercules did shake down mellow fruit.
you have made fair work!
but is this true, sir?
ay and you'll look pale before you find it other.
all the regions do smilingly revolt and who resist are mock'd for valiant ignorance, and perish constant fools.
who is't can blame him?
your enemies and his find something in him.
we are all undone, unless the noble man have mercy.
who shall ask it?
the tribunes cannot do't for shame the people deserve such pity of him as the wolf for his best friends, if they should say 'be good to rome,' they charged him even as those should do that had deserved his hate, and therein show'd like enemies.
' if he were putting to my house the brand that should consume it, i have not the face to say 'beseech you, cease.
' you have made fair hands, you and your crafts!
you have crafted fair!
you have brought a trembling upon rome, such as was never so incapable of help.
say not we brought it.
how!
was it we?
we loved him but, like beasts and cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters, who did hoot him out o' the city.
but i fear they'll roar him in again.
tullus aufidius, the second name of men, obeys his points desperation is all the policy, strength and defence, that rome can make against them.
here come the clusters.
and is aufidius with him?
you are they that made the air unwholesome, when you cast your stinking greasy caps in hooting at coriolanus' exile.
now he's coming and not a hair upon a soldier's head as many coxcombs as you threw caps up will he tumble down, and pay you for your voices.
'tis no matter if he could burn us all into one coal, we have deserved it.
faith, we hear fearful news.
for mine own part, when i said, banish him, i said 'twas pity.
and so did i.
and so did i and, to say the truth, so did very that we did, we did for the best and though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.
ye re goodly things, you voices!
you have made good work, you and your cry!
shall's to the capitol?
o, ay, what else?
go, masters, get you home be not dismay' these are a side that would be glad to have this true which they so seem to fear.
go home, and show no sign of fear.
the gods be good to us!
come, masters, let's home.
i ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished him.
so did we all.
but, come, let's home.
i do not like this news.
nor i.
let's to the capitol.
would half my wealth would buy this for a lie!
pray, let us go.
do they still fly to the roman?
i do not know what witchcraft's in him, but your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat, their talk at table, and their thanks at end and you are darken'd in this action, sir, even by your own.
i cannot help it now, unless, by using means, i lame the foot of our design.
he bears himself more proudlier, even to my person, than i thought he would yet his nature in that's no changeling and i must excuse what cannot be amended.
yet i wish, sir, i mean for your particular,you had not join'd in commission with him but either had borne the action of yourself, or else to him had left it solely.
i understand thee well and be thou sure, when he shall come to his account, he knows not what i can urge against him.
although it seems, and so he thinks, and is no less apparent to the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
and shows good husbandry for the volscian state, fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon as draw his sword yet he hath left undone that which shall break his neck or hazard mine, whene'er we come to our account.
sir, i beseech you, think you he'll carry rome?
all places yield to him ere he sits down the tribunes are no soldiers and their people will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty to expel him thence.
i think he'll be to rome as is the osprey to the fish, who takes it by sovereignty of nature.
first he was a noble servant to them but he could not whether 'twas pride, which out of daily fortune ever taints the happy man whether defect of judgment, to fail in the disposing of those chances which he was lord of or whether nature, not to be other than one thing, not moving from the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace even with the same austerity and garb as he controll'd the war but one of these as he hath spices of them all, not all, for i dare so far free himmade him fear'd, so hated, and so banish' but he has a merit, to choke it in the utterance.
so our virtues and power, unto itself most commendable, hath not a tomb so evident as a chair to extol what it hath done.
one fire drives out one fire one nail, one nail rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
come, let's away.
when, caius, rome is thine, thou art poor'st of all then shortly art thou mine.
no, i' you hear what he hath said which was sometime his general who loved him in a most dear particular.
he call' but what o' that?
go, you that banish'd him a mile before his tent fall down, and knee nay, if he coy'd to hear cominius speak, i'll keep at home.
he would not seem to know me.
do you hear?
i urged our old acquaintance, and the drops that we have bled together.
coriolanus forbad all names he was a kind of nothing, titleless, till he had forged himself a name o' the fire of burning rome.
why, you have made good work!
a pair of tribunes that have rack'd for rome, to make coals cheap,a noble memory!
i minded him how royal 'twas to pardon he replied, it was a bare petition of a state to one whom they had punish'd.
could he say less?
i offer'd to awaken his regard for' his answer to me was, he could not stay to pick them in a pile he said 'twas folly, for one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt, and still to nose the offence.
for one poor grain or two!
i am one of those his mother, wife, his child, and this brave fellow too, you are the musty chaff and you are smelt we must be burnt for you.
nay, pray, if you refuse your aid in this so neverneeded help, yet do not upbraid's with our distress.
but, sure, if you would be your country's pleader, your good tongue, more than the instant army we can make, might stop our countryman.
no, i'll not meddle.
pray you, go to him.
what should i do?
only make trial what your love can do for rome, towards marcius.
well, and say that marcius return me, as cominius is return'd, unheard what then?
but as a discontented friend, griefshot with his unkindness?
say't be so?
yet your good will must have that thanks from rome, after the measure as you intended well.
i'll undertake ' i think he'll hear me.
yet, to bite his lip and hum at good cominius, much unhearts me.
he was not taken well the veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then we pout upon the morning, are unapt to give or to forgive but when we have stuff'd these and these conveyances of our blood with wine and feeding, we have suppler souls than in our priest therefore i'll watch him till he be dieted to my request, and then i'll set upon him.
you know the very road into his kindness, and cannot lose your way.
good faith, i'll prove him, speed how it will.
i shall ere long have knowledge of my success.
he'll never hear him.
not?
i tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye red as 'twould burn rome and his injury the gaoler to his pity.
i kneel'd before him 'twas very faintly he said 'rise' dismiss'd me thus, what he would do, he sent in writing after me what he would not, so that all hope is vain.
unless his noble mother, and his wife who, as i hear, mean to solicit him for mercy to his country.
therefore, let's hence, and with our fair entreaties haste them on.
whence are you?
stand, and go back.
you guard like men ' but, by your leave, i am an officer of state, and come to speak with coriolanus.
from whence?
from rome.
you may not pass, our general will no more hear from thence.
you'll see your rome embraced with fire before you'll speak with coriolanus.
good my friends, if you have heard your general talk of rome, and of his friends there, it is lots to blanks, my name hath touch'd your ears it is menenius.
be it so the virtue of your name is not here passable.
i tell thee, fellow, i have been the book of his good acts, whence men have read his name unparallel'd, haply amplified for i have ever verified my friends, of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity nay, sometimes, like to a bowl upon a subtle ground, i have tumbled past the throw and in his praise have almost stamp' therefore, fellow, i must have leave to pass.
faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely.
therefore, go back.
prithee, fellow, remember my name is menenius, always factionary on the party of your general.
howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you have, i am one that, telling true under him, must say, you cannot pass.
therefore, go back.
has he dined, canst thou tell?
for i would not speak with him till after dinner.
you are a roman, are you?
i am, as thy general is.
then you should hate rome, as he does.
can you, when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be?
can you think to blow out the intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with such weak breath as this?
no, you are deceived therefore, back to rome, and prepare for your you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.
sirrah, if thy captain knew i were here, he would use me with estimation.
come, my captain knows you not.
i mean, thy general.
my general cares not for you.
back, i say, go lest i let forth your halfpint of blood back,that's back.
nay, but, fellow, fellow, what's the matter?
now, you companion, i' you shall know now that i am in estimation you shall perceive that a jack guardant cannot office me from guess, but by my entertainment with him, if thou standest not i' the state of hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship, and crueller in suffering behold now presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
the glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old father menenius does!
o my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us look thee, here's water to quench it.
i was hardly moved to come to thee but being assured none but myself could move thee, i have been blown out of your gates with sighs and conjure thee to pardon rome, and thy petitionary countrymen.
the good gods assuage thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,this, who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.
away!
how!
away!
wife, mother, child, i know not.
my affairs though i owe my revenge properly, my remission lies in volscian breasts.
that we have been familiar, ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather than pity note how much.
therefore, be gone.
mine ears against your suits are stronger than your gates against my force.
yet, for i loved thee, take this along i writ it for thy sake and would have rent it.
another word, menenius, i will not hear thee speak.
this man, aufidius, yet thou behold'st!
you keep a constant temper.
now, sir, is your name menenius?
'tis a spell, you see, you know the way home again.
do you hear how we are shent for keeping your greatness back?
what cause, do you think, i have to swoon?
for such things as you, i can scarce think there's any, ye're so slight.
he that hath a will to die by let your general do his worst.
for you, be that you are, long and your misery increase with your age!
i say to you, as i was said to, away!
a noble fellow, i warrant him.
he's the rock, the oak not to be windshaken.
we will before the walls of rome tomorrow set down our host.
my partner in this action, you must report to the volscian lords, how plainly i have borne this business.
only their ends you have respected stopp'd your ears against the general suit of rome never admitted a private whisper, no, not with such friends that thought them sure of you.
this last old man, whom with a crack'd heart i have sent to rome, loved me above the measure of a father nay, godded me, indeed.
their latest refuge was to send him for whose old love i have, though i show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd the first conditions, which they did refuse and cannot now accept to grace him only that thought he could do more, a very little fresh embassies and suits, nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter will i lend ear to.
what shout is this?
shall i be tempted to infringe my vow in the same time 'tis made?
i will not.
my wife comes foremost then the honour'd mould wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand the grandchild to her blood.
but, out, affection!
all bond and privilege of nature, break!
let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
what is that curt'sy worth?
or those doves' eyes, which can make gods forsworn?
i melt, and am not of stronger earth than others.
my mother bows as if olympus to a molehill should and my young boy hath an aspect of intercession, which great nature cries 'deny not.
' let the volsces i'll never be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, as if a man were author of himself and knew no other kin.
my lord and husband!
these eyes are not the same i wore in rome.
the sorrow that delivers us thus changed makes you think so.
like a dull actor now, i have forgot my part, and i am out, even to a full disgrace.
best of my flesh, forgive my tyranny but do not say for that 'forgive our romans.
' o, a kiss long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss i carried from thee, dear and my true lip hath virgin'd it e'er since.
you gods!
i prate, and the most noble mother of the world sink, my knee, i' the earth of thy deep duty more impression show than that of common sons.
o, stand up blest!
whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, i kneel before thee and unproperly show duty, as mistaken all this while between the child and parent.
what is this?
your knees to me?
to your corrected son?
then let the pebbles on the hungry beach fillip the stars then let the mutinous winds strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun murdering impossibility, to make what cannot be, slight work.
thou art my warrior i holp to frame thee.
do you know this lady?
the noble sister of publicola, the moon of rome, chaste as the icicle that's curdied by the frost from purest snow and hangs on dian' dear valeria!
this is a poor epitome of yours, which by the interpretation of full time may show like all yourself.
the god of soldiers, with the consent of supreme jove, inform thy thoughts with nobleness that thou mayst prove to shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars like a great seamark, standing every flaw, and saving those that eye thee!
your knee, sirrah.
that's my brave boy!
even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, are suitors to you.
i beseech you, or, if you'ld ask, the thing i have forsworn to grant may never be held by you denials.
do not bid me dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate again with rome' tell me not desire not to ally my rages and revenges with your colder reasons.
o, no more, no more!
you have said you will not grant us any thing for we have nothing else to ask, but that yet we will ask that, if you fail in our request, the blame therefore hear us.
aufidius, and you volsces, mark for we'll hear nought from rome in private.
your request?
should we be silent and not speak, our raiment and state of bodies would bewray what life we have led since thy exile.
think with thyself how more unfortunate than all living women since that thy sight, which should make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow making the mother, wife and child to see the son, the husband and the father tearing his country's bowels out.
and to poor we thine enmity' thou barr'st us our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort that all but we enjoy for how can we, alas, how can we for our country pray.
whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, whereto we are bound?
alack, or we must lose the country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, our comfort in the country.
we must find an evident calamity, though we had our wish, for either thou must, as a foreign recreant, be led with manacles thorough our streets, or else triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, and bear the palm for having bravely shed thy wife and children's blood.
for myself, son, i purpose not to wait on fortune till if i cannot persuade thee rather to show a noble grace to both parts than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner march to assault thy country than to tread trust to't, thou shalt noton thy mother's womb, that brought thee to this world.
ay, and mine, that brought you forth this boy, to keep your name living to time.
a' shall not tread on me i'll run away till i am bigger, but then i'll fight.
not of a woman's tenderness to be, requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
i have sat too long.
nay, go not from us thus.
if it were so that our request did tend to save the romans, thereby to destroy the volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, no our suit while the volsces may say 'this mercy we have show'd' the romans, 'this we received' and each in either side give the allhail to thee and cry 'be blest for making up this peace!
' thou know'st, great son, the end of war's uncertain, but this certain, that, if thou conquer rome, the benefit which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses 'the man was noble, but with his last attempt he wiped it out destroy'd his country, and his name remains to the ensuing age abhorr'd.
' speak to me, thou hast affected the fine strains of honour, to imitate the graces of the gods to tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, and yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt that should but rive an oak.
why dost not speak?
think'st thou it honourable for a noble man still to remember wrongs?
daughter, he cares not for your weeping.
speak thou, perhaps thy childishness will move him more than can our reasons.
there's no man in the world more bound to 's mother yet here he lets me prate like one i' the stocks.
thou hast never in thy life show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, when she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, loaden with honour.
say my request's unjust, but if it be not so, thou art not honest and the gods will plague thee, that thou restrain'st from me the duty which to a mother's part belongs.
down, ladies let us shame him with our knees.
to his surname coriolanus 'longs more pride than pity to our prayers.
an end so we will home to rome, and die among our neighbours.
nay, behold ' this boy, that cannot tell what he would have but kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, does reason our petition with more strength than thou hast to deny 't.
come, this fellow had a volscian to his mother his wife is in corioli and his child like him by chance.
i am hush'd until our city be afire, and then i'll speak a little.
o mother, mother!
what have you done?
behold, the heavens do ope, the gods look down, and this unnatural scene they laugh at.
o my mother, mother!
you have won a happy victory to rome but, for your son,believe it, o, believe it, most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, if not most mortal to him.
but, let it come.
aufidius, though i cannot make true wars, i'll frame convenient peace.
now, good aufidius, were you in my stead, would you have heard a mother less?
or granted less, aufidius?
i was moved withal.
and, sir, it is no little thing to make mine eyes to sweat compassion.
but, good sir, what peace you'll make, for my part, i'll not to rome, i'll back with you and pray you, stand to me in this cause.
o mother!
wife!
ay, by and by but we will drink together and you shall bear a better witness back than words, which we, on like conditions, will have counterseal'd.
come, enter with us.
ladies, you deserve all the swords in italy, and her confederate arms, could not have made this peace.
see you yond coign o' the capitol, yond cornerstone?
why, what of that?
if it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
but i say there is no hope in' our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.
is't possible that so short a time can alter the condition of a man!
there is differency between a grub and a butterfly yet your butterfly was a grub.
this marcius is grown he has wings he's more than a creeping thing.
he loved his mother dearly.
and he no more remembers his mother now than an eightyearold horse.
the tartness when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before he is able to pierce a corslet with his eye talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery.
he sits in his state, as a thing made for alexander.
what he bids be done is finished with his bidding.
he wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.
yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
i paint him in the character.
mark what mercy his there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger that and all this is long of you.
the gods be good unto us!
no, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us.
when we banished him, we respected not them and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.
sir, if you'ld save your life, the plebeians have got your fellowtribune and hale him up and down, all swearing, if the roman ladies bring not comfort home, they'll give him death by inches.
what's the news?
good news, good news the ladies have prevail'd, the volscians are dislodged, a merrier day did never yet greet rome, no, not the expulsion of the tarquins.
friend, art thou certain this is true?
is it most certain?
where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide, as the recomforted through the gates.
why, hark you!
the trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, tabours and cymbals and the shouting romans, make the sun dance.
hark you!
i will go meet the ladies.
this volumnia is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, a city full of tribunes, such as you, a sea and land full.
you have pray'd well to this morning for ten thousand of your throats i'd not have given a doit.
hark, how they joy!
first, the gods bless you for your tidings next, accept my thankfulness.
sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.
they are near the city?
almost at point to enter.
we will meet them, and help the joy.
behold our patroness, the life of rome!
call all your tribes together, praise the gods, and make triumphant fires unshout the noise that banish'd marcius, repeal him with the welcome of his mother cry 'welcome, ladies, welcome!
' welcome, ladies, welcome!
go tell the lords o' having read it, bid them repair to the market place where i, even in theirs and in the commons' ears, will vouch the truth of it.
him i accuse the city ports by this hath enter'd and intends to appear before the people, hoping dispatch.
most welcome!
how is it with our general?
even so as with a man by his own alms empoison'd, and with his charity slain.
most noble sir, if you do hold the same intent wherein you wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you of your great danger.
sir, we must proceed as we do find the people.
the people will remain uncertain whilst 'twixt you there's difference but the fall of either makes the survivor heir of all.
i know it and my pretext to strike at him admits a good construction.
i raised him, and i pawn'd who being so heighten'd, he water'd his new plants with dews of flattery, seducing so my friends and, to this end, he bow'd his nature, never known before but to be rough, unswayable and free.
sir, his stoutness when he did stand for consul, which he lost by lack of stooping, being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth i took him made him jointservant with me gave him way in all his own desires nay, let him choose out of my files, his projects to accomplish, my best and freshest men served his designments in mine own person holp to reap the fame which he did end all his and took some pride till, at the last, i seem'd his follower, not partner, and he waged me with his countenance, as if i had been mercenary.
so he did, the army marvell'd at it, and, in the last, when he had carried rome and that we look'd for no less spoil than glory, for which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
at a few drops of women's rheum, which are as cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour therefore shall he die, and i'll renew me in his fall.
but, hark!
your native town you enter'd like a post, but he returns, splitting the air with noise.
and patient fools, whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear with giving him glory.
therefore, at your vantage, ere he express himself, or move the people with what he would say, let him feel your sword, which we will second.
when he lies along, after your way his tale pronounced shall bury his reasons with his body.
here come the lords.
you are most welcome home.
i have not deserved it.
but, worthy lords, have you with heed perused what i have written to you?
we have.
and grieve to hear't.
what faults he made before the last, i think but there to end where he was to begin and give away the benefit of our levies, answering us with our own charge, making a treaty where there was a yielding,this admits no excuse.
you shall hear him.
hail, lords!
i am return'd your soldier, no more infected with my country's love than when i parted hence, but still subsisting under your great command.
you are to know that prosperously i have attempted and with bloody passage led your wars even to the gates of rome.
our spoils we have brought home do more than counterpoise a full third part the charges of the action.
we have made peace with no less honour to the antiates and we here deliver, subscribed by the consuls and patricians, together with the seal o' the senate, what we have compounded on.
read it not, noble lords but tell the traitor, in the high'st degree he hath abused your powers.
traitor!
how now!
ay, traitor, marcius!
marcius!
ay, marcius, dost thou think i'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name coriolanus in corioli?
you lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously he has betray'd your business, and given up, for certain drops of salt, your city rome, i say 'your city,' to his wife and mother breaking his oath and resolution like a twist of rotten silk, never admitting counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears he whined and roar'd away your victory, that pages blush'd at him and men of heart look'd wondering each at other.
hear'st thou, mars?
name not the god, thou boy of tears!
no more.
measureless liar, thou hast made my heart too great for what contains it.
boy!
o slave!
pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever i was forced to scold.
your judgments, my grave lords, and his own notion who wears my stripes impress'd upon him that must bear my beating to his graveshall join to thrust the lie unto him.
peace, both, and hear me speak.
cut me to pieces, volsces men and lads, stain all your edges on me.
boy!
false hound!
if you have writ your annals true, 'tis there, that, like an eagle in a dovecote, i flutter' alone i did it.
boy!
why, noble lords, will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 'fore your own eyes and ears?
let him die for't.
'tear him to pieces.
' 'do it presently.
' 'he kill'd my son.
' 'my daughter.
' 'he killed my cousin marcus.
' 'he killed my father.
' peace, ho!
peace!
the man is noble and his fame foldsin this orb o' the earth.
his last offences to us shall have judicious hearing.
stand, aufidius, and trouble not the peace.
o that i had him, with six aufidiuses, or more, his tribe, to use my lawful sword!
insolent villain!
kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
hold, hold, hold, hold!
my noble masters, hear me speak.
o tullus, thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.
tread not upon him.
masters all, be quiet put up your swords.
my lords, when you shall knowas in this rage, provoked by him, you cannotthe great danger which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice that he is thus cut off.
please it your honours to call me to your senate, i'll deliver myself your loyal servant, or endure your heaviest censure.
bear from hence his body let him be regarded as the most noble corse that ever herald did follow to his urn.
his own impatience takes from aufidius a great part of blame.
let's make the best of it.
my rage is gone and i am struck with sorrow.
take him up.
help, three o' the chiefest soldiers i'll be one.
beat thou the drum, trail your steel pikes.
though in this city he hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, which to this hour bewail the injury, yet he shall have a noble memory.
assist.
now is the winter of our discontent made glorious summer by this sun of york and all the clouds that lour'd upon our house in the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths our bruised arms hung up for monuments our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
grimvisaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front and now, instead of mounting barded steeds to fright the souls of fearful adversaries, he capers nimbly in a lady's chamber to the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
but i, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, nor made to court an amorous lookingglass i, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty to strut before a wanton ambling nymph i, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion, cheated of feature by dissembling nature, deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time into this breathing world, scarce half made up, and that so lamely and unfashionable that dogs bark at me as i halt by them why, i, in this weak piping time of peace, have no delight to pass away the time, unless to spy my shadow in the sun and therefore, since i cannot prove a lover, to entertain these fair wellspoken days, i am determined to prove a villain and hate the idle pleasures of these days.
plots have i laid, inductions dangerous, by drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, to set my brother clarence and the king and if king edward be as true and just as i am subtle, false and treacherous, this day should clarence closely be mew'd up, about a prophecy, which says that 'g' of edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
dive, thoughts, here clarence comes.
brother, good day what means this armed guard that waits upon your grace?
his majesty tendering my person's safety, hath appointed this conduct to convey me to the tower.
upon what cause?
because my name is george.
alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours he should, for that, o, belike his majesty hath some intent that you shall be newchristen'd in the tower.
but what's the matter, clarence?
may i know?
yea, richard, when i know for i protest but, as i can learn, he hearkens after prophecies and dreams and from the crossrow plucks the letter g.
and says a wizard told him that by g his issue disinherited should be and, for my name of george begins with g, it follows in his thought that i am he.
these, as i learn, and such like toys as these have moved his highness to commit me now.
why, this it is, ' my lady grey his wife, clarence, 'tis she that tempers him to this extremity.
was it not she and that good man of worship, anthony woodville, her brother there, that made him send lord hastings to the tower, from whence this present day he is deliver'd?
we are not safe, clarence we are not safe.
by heaven, i think there's no man is secure but the queen's kindred and nightwalking heralds that trudge betwixt the king and mistress shore.
heard ye not what an humble suppliant lord hastings was to her for his delivery?
humbly complaining to her deity got my lord chamberlain his liberty.
i'll tell you what i think it is our way, if we will keep in favour with the king, the jealous o'erworn widow and herself, since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen.
are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
i beseech your graces both to pardon me his majesty hath straitly given in charge that no man shall have private conference, of what degree soever, with his brother.
even so an't please your worship, brakenbury, we speak no treason, we say the king is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen well struck in years, fair, and not jealous we say that shore's wife hath a pretty foot, a cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue and that the queen's kindred are made gentle how say you sir?
can you deny all this?
with this, my lord, myself have nought to do.
naught to do with mistress shore!
i tell thee, fellow, he that doth naught with her, excepting one, were best he do it secretly, alone.
what one, my lord?
her husband, wouldst thou betray me?
i beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal forbear your conference with the noble duke.
we know thy charge, brakenbury, and will obey.
we are the queen's abjects, and must obey.
brother, i will unto the king and whatsoever you will employ me in, were it to call king edward's widow sister, i will perform it to enfranchise you.
meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood touches me deeper than you can imagine.
i know it pleaseth neither of us well.
well, your imprisonment shall not be long meantime, have patience.
i must perforce.
farewell.
go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
simple, plain clarence!
i do love thee so, that i will shortly send thy soul to heaven, if heaven will take the present at our hands.
but who comes here?
the newdeliver'd hastings?
good time of day unto my gracious lord!
as much unto my good lord chamberlain!
well are you welcome to the open air.
how hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?
with patience, noble lord, but i shall live, my lord, to give them thanks that were the cause of my imprisonment.
no doubt, no doubt and so shall clarence too for they that were your enemies are his, and have prevail'd as much on him as you.
more pity that the eagle should be mew'd, while kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
what news abroad?
no news so bad abroad as this at home the king is sickly, weak and melancholy, and his physicians fear him mightily.
now, by saint paul, this news is bad indeed.
o, he hath kept an evil diet long, 'tis very grievous to be thought upon.
what, is he in his bed?
he is.
go you before, and i will follow you.
he cannot live, i hope and must not die till george be pack'd with posthorse up to heaven.
i'll in, to urge his hatred more to clarence, with lies well steel'd with weighty arguments and, if i fall not in my deep intent, which done, god take king edward to his mercy, and leave the world for me to bustle in!
for then i'll marry warwick's youngest daughter.
what though i kill'd her husband and her father?
the readiest way to make the wench amends the which will i not all so much for love as for another secret close intent, by marrying her which i must reach unto.
clarence still breathes when they are gone, then must i count my gains.
set down, set down your honourable load, if honour may be shrouded in a hearse, whilst i awhile obsequiously lament the untimely fall of virtuous lancaster.
poor keycold figure of a holy king!
pale ashes of the house of lancaster!
thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
be it lawful that i invocate thy ghost, to hear the lamentations of poor anne, wife to thy edward, to thy slaughter'd son, stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!
lo, in these windows that let forth thy life, i pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!
cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!
cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
more direful hap betide that hated wretch, that makes us wretched by the death of thee, than i can wish to adders, spiders, toads, or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
if ever he have child, abortive be it, prodigious, and untimely brought to light, whose ugly and unnatural aspect may fright the hopeful mother at the view and that be heir to his unhappiness!
if ever he have wife, let her he made a miserable by the death of him as i am made by my poor lord and thee!
come, now towards chertsey with your holy load, taken from paul's to be interred there and still, as you are weary of the weight, rest you, whiles i lament king henry's corse.
stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
what black magician conjures up this fiend, to stop devoted charitable deeds?
villains, set down the corse or, by saint paul, i'll make a corse of him that disobeys.
my lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.
unmanner'd dog!
stand thou, advance thy halbert higher than my breast, or, by saint paul, i'll strike thee to my foot, and spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
what, do you tremble?
are you all afraid?
alas, i blame you not for you are mortal, and mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
thou hadst but power over his mortal body, his soul thou canst not have therefore be gone.
sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
foul devil, for god's sake, hence, and trouble us not for thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
o, gentlemen, see, see!
dead henry's wounds open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh!
blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity for 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood from cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells thy deed, inhuman and unnatural, provokes this deluge most unnatural.
o god, which this blood madest, revenge his death!
o earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death!
either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead, or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick, as thou dost swallow up this good king's blood which his hellgovern'd arm hath butchered!
lady, you know no rules of charity, which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
villain, thou know' no beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
but i know none, and therefore am no beast.
o wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
more wonderful, when angels are so angry.
vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, of these supposedevils, to give me leave, by circumstance, but to acquit myself.
vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, for these known evils, but to give me leave, by circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.
fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have some patient leisure to excuse myself.
fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make no excuse current, but to hang thyself.
by such despair, i should accuse myself.
and, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused for doing worthy vengeance on thyself, which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
say that i slew them not?
why, but dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.
i did not kill your husband.
why, then he is alive.
nay, he is dead and slain by edward's hand.
queen margaret saw thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood the which thou once didst bend against her breast, but that thy brothers beat aside the point.
i was provoked by her slanderous tongue, which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind.
didst thou not kill this king?
i grant ye.
dost grant me, hedgehog?
then, god grant me too thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
o, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!
the fitter for the king of heaven, that hath him.
he is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
let him thank me, that holp to send him thither for he was fitter for that place than earth.
and thou unfit for any place but hell.
yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
some dungeon.
your bedchamber.
i'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
so will it, madam till i lie with you.
i hope so.
i know so.
but, gentle lady anne, to leave this keen encounter of our wits, and fall somewhat into a slower method, is not the causer of the timeless deaths of these plantagenets, henry and edward, as blameful as the executioner?
thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.
your beauty was the cause of that effect which did haunt me in my sleep to undertake the death of all the world, so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
if i thought that, i tell thee, homicide, these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
these eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck you should not blemish it, as all the world is cheered by the sun, so i by that it is my day, my life.
black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!
curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.
i would i were, to be revenged on thee.
it is a quarrel most unnatural, to be revenged on him that loveth you.
it is a quarrel just and reasonable, to be revenged on him that slew my husband.
he that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband, did it to help thee to a better husband.
his better doth not breathe upon the earth.
he lives that loves thee better than he could.
name him.
plantagenet.
why, that was he.
the selfsame name, but one of better nature.
where is he?
here.
why dost thou spit at me?
would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!
never came poison from so sweet a place.
never hung poison on a fouler toad.
out of my sight!
thou dost infect my eyes.
thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!
i would they were, that i might die at once for now they kill me with a living death.
those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, these eyes that never shed remorseful tear, no, when my father york and edward wept, to hear the piteous moan that rutland made when blackfaced clifford shook his sword at him nor when thy warlike father, like a child, told the sad story of my father's death, and twenty times made pause to sob and weep, that all the standersby had wet their cheeks like trees bedash' in that sad time my manly eyes did scorn an humble tear and what these sorrows could not thence exhale, thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
i never sued to friend nor enemy my tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word but now thy beauty is proposed my fee, my proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made for kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, lo, here i lend thee this sharppointed sword which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.
and let the soul forth that adoreth thee, i lay it naked to the deadly stroke, and humbly beg the death upon my knee.
nay, do not pause for i did kill king henry, but 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
nay, now dispatch 'twas i that stabb'd young edward, but 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
take up the sword again, or take up me.
arise, though i wish thy death, i will not be the executioner.
then bid me kill myself, and i will do it.
i have already.
tush, speak it again, and, even with the word, that hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love, shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love to both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.
i would i knew thy heart.
'tis figured in my tongue.
i fear me both are false.
then never man was true.
well, well, put up your sword.
say, then, my peace is made.
that shall you know hereafter.
but shall i live in hope?
all men, i hope, live so.
vouchsafe to wear this ring.
to take is not to give.
look, how this ring encompasseth finger.
even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
and if thy poor devoted suppliant may but beg one favour at thy gracious hand, thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.
what is it?
that it would please thee leave these sad designs to him that hath more cause to be a mourner, and presently repair to crosby place where, after i have solemnly interr'd at chertsey monastery this noble king, and wet his grave with my repentant tears, for divers unknown reasons.
i beseech you, grant me this boon.
with all my heart and much it joys me too, to see you are become so penitent.
tressel and berkeley, go along with me.
bid me farewell.
'tis more than you deserve but since you teach me how to flatter you, imagine i have said farewell already.
sirs, take up the corse.
towards chertsey, noble lord?
no, to whitefriars there attend my coining.
was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
was ever woman in this humour won?
i'll have her but i will not keep her long.
what!
i, that kill'd her husband and his father, to take her in her heart's extremest hate, with curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, the bleeding witness of her hatred by having god, her conscience, and these bars against me, and i nothing to back my suit at all, but the plain devil and dissembling looks, and yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
hath she forgot already that brave prince, edward, her lord, whom i, some three months since, stabb'd in my angry mood at tewksbury?
a sweeter and a lovelier gentleman, framed in the prodigality of nature, young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, the spacious world cannot again afford and will she yet debase her eyes on me, that cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince, and made her widow to a woful bed?
on me, whose all not equals edward's moiety?
on me, that halt and am unshapen thus?
my dukedom to a beggarly denier, upon my life, she finds, although i cannot, myself to be a marvellous proper man.
i'll be at charges for a lookingglass, and entertain some score or two of tailors, since i am crept in favour with myself, will maintain it with some little cost.
but first i'll turn yon fellow in his grave and then return lamenting to my love.
shine out, fair sun, till i have bought a glass, that i may see my shadow as i pass.
have patience, there's no doubt his majesty will soon recover his accustom'd health.
in that you brook it in, therefore, for god's sake, entertain good comfort, and cheer his grace with quick and merry words.
if he were dead, what would betide of me?
no other harm but loss of such a lord.
the loss of such a lord includes all harm.
the heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son, to be your comforter when he is gone.
oh, he is young and his minority is put unto the trust of richard gloucester, a man that loves not me, nor none of you.
is it concluded that he shall be protector?
it is determined, but so it must be, if the king miscarry.
here come the lords of buckingham and derby.
good time of day unto your royal grace!
god make your majesty joyful as you have been!
the countess richmond, good my lord of derby.
to your good prayers will scarcely say amen.
yet, derby, notwithstanding she's your wife, and loves not me, be you, good lord, assured i hate not you for her proud arrogance.
i do beseech you, either not believe the envious slanders of her false accusers or, if she be accused in true report, bear with her weakness, which, i think proceeds from wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.
saw you the king today, my lord of derby?
but now the duke of buckingham and i are come from visiting his majesty.
what likelihood of his amendment, lords?
madam, good hope his grace speaks cheerfully.
god grant him health!
did you confer with him?
madam, he desires to make atonement betwixt the duke of gloucester and your brothers, and betwixt them and my lord chamberlain and sent to warn them to his royal presence.
would all were well!
but that will never be i fear our happiness is at the highest.
they do me wrong, who are they that complain unto the king, that i, forsooth, am stern, and love them not?
by holy paul, they love his grace but lightly that fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
because i cannot flatter and speak fair, smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, duck with french nods and apish courtesy, i must be held a rancorous enemy.
cannot a plain man live and think no harm, but thus his simple truth must be abused by silken, sly, insinuating jacks?
to whom in all this presence speaks your grace?
to thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
when have i injured thee?
when done thee wrong?
or thee?
or thee?
or any of your faction?
a plague upon you all!
his royal person, whom god preserve better than you would wish!
cannot be quiet scarce a breathingwhile, but you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
brother of gloucester, you mistake the matter.
the king, of his own royal disposition, and not provoked by any suitor else aiming, belike, at your interior hatred, which in your outward actions shows itself against my kindred, brothers, and myself, makes him to send that thereby he may gather the ground of your illwill, and so remove it.
the world is grown so bad, since every jack became a gentleman there's many a gentle person made a jack.
come, come, we know your meaning, brother gloucester you envy my advancement and my friends' god grant we never may have need of you!
meantime, your brother is imprison'd by your means, myself disgraced, and the nobility held in contempt whilst many fair promotions are daily given to ennoble those that scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.
by him that raised me to this careful height from that contented hap which i enjoy'd, i never did incense his majesty against the duke of clarence, but have been an earnest advocate to plead for him.
my lord, you do me shameful injury, falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
you may deny that you were not the cause of my lord hastings' late imprisonment.
she may, my lord, for she may, lord rivers!
why, who knows not so?
she may do more, sir, she may help you to many fair preferments, and then deny her aiding hand therein, and lay those honours on your high deserts.
what may she not?
she may, yea, marry, may she what, marry, may she?
what, marry, may she!
marry with a king, a bachelor, i wis your grandam had a worser match.
my lord of gloucester, i have too long borne by heaven, i will acquaint his majesty with those gross taunts i often have endured.
i had rather be a country servantmaid than a great queen, with this condition, to be thus taunted, scorn'd, small joy have i in being england's queen.
and lessen'd be that small, god, i beseech thee!
thy honour, state and seat is due to me.
what!
threat you me with telling of the king?
tell him, look, what i have said i dare adventure to be sent to the tower.
'tis time to speak my pains are quite forgot.
out, devil!
thou slewest my husband henry in the tower, and edward, my poor son, at tewksbury.
ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king, i was a packhorse in his great affairs a weederout of his proud adversaries, to royalize his blood i spilt mine own.
yea, and much better blood than his or thine.
in all which time you and your husband grey were factious for the house of lancaster and, rivers, so were you.
was not your husband in margaret's battle at saint alban's slain?
let me put in your minds, if you forget, what you have been ere now, and what you are withal, what i have been, and what i am.
a murderous villain, and so still thou art.
poor clarence did forsake his father, warwick yea, and forswore himself,which jesu pardon!
which god revenge!
to fight on edward's party for the crown and for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up.
i would to god my heart were flint, like edward's or edward's soft and pitiful, like mine i am too childishfoolish for this world.
hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, thou cacodemon!
there thy kingdom is.
my lord of gloucester, in those busy days which here you urge to prove us enemies, we follow'd then our lord, so should we you, if you should be our king.
if i should be!
far be it from my heart, the thought of it!
as little joy, my lord, as you suppose you should enjoy, were you this country's king, as little joy may you suppose in me.
that i enjoy, being the queen thereof.
a little joy enjoys the queen thereof for i am she, and altogether joyless.
i can no longer hold me patient.
hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out in sharing that which you have pill'd from me!
which of you trembles not that looks on me?
if not, that, i being queen, you bow like subjects, yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?
o gentle villain, do not turn away!
foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?
but repetition of what thou hast marr'd that will i make before i let thee go.
wert thou not banished on pain of death?
i was but i do find more pain in banishment than death can yield me here by my abode.
a husband and a son thou owest to me and thou a kingdom the sorrow that i have, by right is yours, and all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
the curse my noble father laid on thee, when thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper and with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, and then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty rutland his curses, then from bitterness of soul denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee and god, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
so just is god, to right the innocent.
o, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe, and the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
no man but prophesied revenge for it.
northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
what were you snarling all before i came, ready to catch each other by the throat, and turn you all your hatred now on me?
did york's dread curse prevail so much with heaven?
that henry's death, my lovely edward's death, their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment, could all but answer for that peevish brat?
can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
if not by war, by surfeit die your king, as ours by murder, to make him a king!
edward thy son, which now is prince of wales, for edward my son, which was prince of wales, die in his youth by like untimely violence!
thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss and see another, as i see thee now, deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
long die thy happy days before thy death and, after many lengthen'd hours of grief, die neither mother, wife, nor england's queen!
rivers and dorset, you were standers by, and so wast thou, lord hastings, when my son was stabb' god, i pray him, that none of you may live your natural age, but by some unlook'd accident cut off!
have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag!
and leave out thee?
stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
if heaven have any grievous plague in store exceeding those that i can wish upon thee, o, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe, and then hurl down their indignation on thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
the worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest, and take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
no sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, unless it be whilst some tormenting dream affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
thou elvishmark'd, abortive, rooting hog!
thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity the slave of nature and the son of hell!
thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb!
thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
thou rag of honour!
thou detested margaret.
richard!
i call thee not.
i cry thee mercy then, for i had thought that thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.
why, so i did but look'd for no reply.
o, let me make the period to my curse!
'tis done by me, and ends in 'margaret.
' thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
fool, fool!
thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
the time will come when thou shalt wish for me to help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.
falseboding woman, end thy frantic curse, lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
foul shame upon you!
you have all moved mine.
were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
to serve me well, you all should do me duty, teach me to be your queen, o, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
dispute not with her she is lunatic.
peace, master marquess, your firenew stamp of honour is scarce current.
o, that your young nobility could judge what 'twere to lose it, and be miserable!
they that stand high have many blasts to shake them and if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
good counsel, learn it, learn it, marquess.
it toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.
yea, but i was born so high, our aery buildeth in the cedar's top, and dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
and turns the sun to shade alas!
alas!
witness my son, now in the shade of death whose bright outshining beams thy cloudy wrath hath in eternal darkness folded up.
your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.
o god, that seest it, do not suffer it!
as it was won with blood, lost be it so!
have done!
for shame, if not for charity.
uncharitably with me have you dealt, and shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.
my charity is outrage, life my shame and in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.
have done, have done.
o princely buckingham i'll kiss thy hand, now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
thy garments are not spotted with our blood, nor thou within the compass of my curse.
nor no one here for curses never pass the lips of those that breathe them in the air.
i'll not believe but they ascend the sky, and there awake god's gentlesleeping peace.
o buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
look, when he fawns, he bites and when he bites, have not to do with him, beware of him sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him, and all their ministers attend on him.
what doth she say, my lord of buckingham?
nothing that i respect, my gracious lord.
what, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
and soothe the devil that i warn thee from?
o, but remember this another day, when he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, and say poor margaret was a prophetess!
live each of you the subjects to his hate, and he to yours, and all of you to god's!
my hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.
i muse why she's at liberty.
by god's holy mother, she hath had too much wrong and i repent my part thereof that i have done to her.
i never did her any, to my knowledge.
but you have all the vantage of her wrong.
i was too hot to do somebody good, that is too cold in thinking of it now.
marry, as for clarence, he is well repaid, he is frank'd up to fatting for his pains god pardon them that are the cause of it!
a virtuous and a christianlike conclusion, to pray for them that have done scathe to us.
being welladvised.
for had i cursed now, i had cursed myself.
madam, his majesty doth call for you, and for your grace and you, my noble lords.
catesby, we come.
lords, will you go with us?
madam, we will attend your grace.
i do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
the secret mischiefs that i set abroach i lay unto the grievous charge of others.
clarence, whom i, indeed, have laid in darkness, i do beweep to many simple gulls namely, to hastings, derby, buckingham and say it is the queen and her allies that stir the king against the duke my brother.
now, they believe it and withal whet me to be revenged on rivers, vaughan, but then i sigh and, with a piece of scripture, and thus i clothe my naked villany with old odd ends stolen out of holy writ and seem a saint, when most i play the devil.
but, soft!
here come my executioners.
how now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
are you now going to dispatch this deed?
we are, my lord and come to have the warrant that we may be admitted where he is.
well thought upon i have it here about me.
when you have done, repair to crosby place.
but, sirs, be sudden in the execution, withal obdurate, do not hear him plead for clarence is wellspoken, and perhaps may move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
tush!
fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate be assured we come to use our hands and not our tongues.
your eyes drop millstones, when fools' i like you, lads about your business straight go, go, dispatch.
we will, my noble lord.
why looks your grace so heavily today?
o, i have pass'd a miserable night, so full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams, that, as i am a christian faithful man, i would not spend another such a night, though 'twere to buy a world of happy days, so full of dismal terror was the time!
what was your dream?
i long to hear you tell it.
methoughts that i had broken from the tower, and was embark'd to cross to burgundy and, in my company, my brother gloucester who from my cabin tempted me to walk thence we looked toward england, and cited up a thousand fearful times, during the wars of york and lancaster that had befall'n us.
as we paced along upon the giddy footing of the hatches, methought that gloucester stumbled and, in falling, struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard, into the tumbling billows of the main.
lord, lord!
methought, what pain it was to drown!
what dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
what ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
methought i saw a thousand fearful wrecks ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, all scatter' some lay in dead men's skulls and, in those holes where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept, as 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems, which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep, and mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.
had you such leisure in the time of death to gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
methought i had and often did i strive but still the envious flood kept in my soul, and would not let it forth to seek the empty, vast and wandering air but smother'd it within my panting bulk, which almost burst to belch it in the sea.
awaked you not with this sore agony?
o, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life o, then began the tempest to my soul, who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood, with that grim ferryman which poets write of, unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
the first that there did greet my stranger soul, was my great fatherinlaw, renowned warwick who cried aloud, 'what scourge for perjury can this dark monarchy afford false clarence?
' and so he vanish' then came wandering by a shadow like an angel, with bright hair dabbled in blood and he squeak'd out aloud, 'clarence is come false, fleeting, perjured clarence, that stabb'd me in the field by tewksbury seize on him, furies, take him to your torments!
' with that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears such hideous cries, that with the very noise i trembling waked, and for a season after could not believe but that i was in hell, such terrible impression made the dream.
no marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you i promise, i am afraid to hear you tell it.
o brakenbury, i have done those things, which now bear evidence against my soul, for edward's sake and see how he requites me!
o god!
if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, but thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, yet execute thy wrath in me alone, o, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
i pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me my soul is heavy, and i fain would sleep.
i will, god give your grace good rest!
sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, makes the night morning, and the noontide night.
princes have but their tides for their glories, an outward honour for an inward toil and, for unfelt imagination, so that, betwixt their tides and low names, there's nothing differs but the outward fame.
who's here?
in god's name what are you, and how came you hither?
i would speak with clarence, and i came hither on my legs.
yea, are you so brief?
o sir, it is better to be brief than tedious.
show him our commission talk no more.
i am, in this, commanded to deliver i will not reason what is meant hereby, because i will be guiltless of the meaning.
here are the keys, i'll to the king and signify to him that thus i have resign'd my charge to you.
do so, fare you well.
what, shall we stab him as he sleeps?
no then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
when he wakes!
why, fool, he shall never wake till the judgmentday.
why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.
the urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
what, art thou afraid?
not to kill him, having a warrant for it but to be damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.
i thought thou hadst been resolute.
so i am, to let him live.
back to the duke of gloucester, tell him so.
i pray thee, i hope my holy humour will change 'twas wont to hold me but while one would tell twenty.
how dost thou feel thyself now?
'faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.
remember our reward, when the deed is done.
'zounds, i had forgot the reward.
where is thy conscience now?
in the duke of gloucester's purse.
so when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.
let it go there's few or none will entertain it.
how if it come to thee again?
i' it a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him he cannot swear, but it cheques him he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom it fills one full of it made me once restore a purse of gold that i found it is turned out of all towns and cities for a dangerous thing and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust to himself and to live without it.
'zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.
take the devil in thy mind, he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
tut, i am strongframed, he cannot prevail with me, i warrant thee.
spoke like a tail fellow that respects his reputation.
come, shall we to this gear?
take him over the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then we will chop him in the malmseybutt in the next room.
o excellent devise!
make a sop of him.
hark!
shall i strike?
no, first let's reason with him.
where art thou, keeper?
give me a cup of wine.
you shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
in god's name, what art thou?
a man, as you are.
but not, as i am, royal.
nor you, as we are, loyal.
thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
my voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.
how darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
why look you pale?
who sent you hither?
wherefore do you come?
to, to, to to murder me?
ay, ay.
you scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, and therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
wherein, my friends, have i offended you?
offended us you have not, but the king.
i shall be reconciled to him again.
never, my lord therefore prepare to die.
are you call'd forth from out a world of men to slay the innocent?
what is my offence?
where are the evidence that do accuse me?
what lawful quest have given their verdict up unto the frowning judge?
or who pronounced the bitter sentence of poor clarence' death?
before i be convict by course of law, to threaten me with death is most unlawful.
i charge you, as you hope to have redemption by christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins, that you depart and lay no hands on me the deed you undertake is damnable.
what we will do, we do upon command.
and he that hath commanded is the king.
erroneous vassal!
the great king of kings hath in the tables of his law commanded and wilt thou, then, spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
take heed for he holds vengeance in his hands, to hurl upon their heads that break his law.
and that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee, thou didst receive the holy sacrament, to fight in quarrel of the house of lancaster.
and, like a traitor to the name of god, didst break that vow and with thy treacherous blade unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.
whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
how canst thou urge god's dreadful law to us, when thou hast broke it in so dear degree?
alas!
for whose sake did i that ill deed?
for edward, for my brother, why, sirs, he sends ye not to murder me for this for in this sin he is as deep as i.
if god will be revenged for this deed.
o, know you yet, he doth it publicly, take not the quarrel from his powerful arm he needs no indirect nor lawless course to cut off those that have offended him.
who made thee, then, a bloody minister, when gallantspringing brave plantagenet, that princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
my brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault, provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
oh, if you love my brother, hate not me i am his brother, and i love him well.
if you be hired for meed, go back again, and i will send you to my brother gloucester, who shall reward you better for my life than edward will for tidings of my death.
you are deceived, your brother gloucester hates you.
o, no, he loves me, go you to him from me.
ay, so we will.
tell him, when that our princely father york bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm, and charged us from his soul to love each other, bid gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
ay, millstones as be lesson'd us to weep.
o, do not slander him, for he is kind.
right, as snow in harvest.
'tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.
it cannot be for when i parted with him, he hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs, that he would labour my delivery.
why, so he doth, now he delivers thee from this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.
make peace with god, for you must die, my lord.
hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul, to counsel me to make my peace with god, and art thou yet to thy own soul so blind, that thou wilt war with god by murdering me?
ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on to do this deed will hate you for the deed.
what shall we do?
relent, and save your souls.
relent!
'tis cowardly and womanish.
not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
which of you, if you were a prince's son, being pent from liberty, as i am now, if two such murderers as yourselves came to you, would not entreat for life?
my friend, o, if thine eye be not a flatterer, come thou on my side, and entreat for me, as you would beg, were you in my distress a begging prince what beggar pities not?
look behind you, my lord.
take that, if all this will not do, i'll drown you in the malmseybutt within.
a bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd!
how fain, like pilate, would i wash my hands of this most grievous guilty murder done!
how now!
what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
by heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!
i would he knew that i had saved his brother!
take thou the fee, and tell him what i say for i repent me that the duke is slain.
go, coward as thou art.
now must i hide his body in some hole, and when i have my meed, i must away for this will out, and here i must not stay.
why, now have i done a good day' you peers, i every day expect an embassage from my redeemer to redeem me hence and now in peace my soul shall part to heaven, since i have set my friends at peace on earth.
rivers and hastings, take each other's hand dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.
by heaven, and with my hand i seal my true heart's love.
so thrive i, as i truly swear the like!
take heed you dally not before your king lest he that is the supreme king of kings confound your hidden falsehood, and award either of you to be the other's end.
so prosper i, as i swear perfect love!
and i, as i love hastings with my heart!
madam, yourself are not exempt in this, nor your son dorset, buckingham, nor you you have been factious one against the other, wife, love lord hastings, let him kiss your hand and what you do, do it unfeignedly.
here, hastings i will never more remember our former hatred, so thrive i and mine!
dorset, embrace him hastings, love lord marquess.
this interchange of love, i here protest, upon my part shall be unviolable.
and so swear i, my lord now, princely buckingham, seal thou this league with thy embracements to my wife's allies, and make me happy in your unity.
whenever buckingham doth turn his hate on you or yours, but with all duteous love doth cherish you and yours, god punish me with hate in those where i expect most love!
when i have most need to employ a friend, and most assured that he is a friend deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile, be he unto me!
this do i beg of god, when i am cold in zeal to yours.
a pleasing cordial, princely buckingham, is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
there wanteth now our brother gloucester here, to make the perfect period of this peace.
and, in good time, here comes the noble duke.
and, princely peers, a happy time of day!
happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
brother, we done deeds of charity made peace enmity, fair love of hate, between these swelling wrongincensed peers.
a blessed labour, amongst this princely heap, if any here, by false intelligence, or wrong surmise, hold me a foe if i unwittingly, or in my rage, have aught committed that is hardly borne by any in this presence, i desire 'tis death to me to be at enmity i hate it, and desire all good men's love.
first, madam, i entreat true peace of you, which i will purchase with my duteous service of you, my noble cousin buckingham, if ever any grudge were lodged between us of you, lord rivers, and, lord grey, of you that without desert have frown'd on me dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen indeed, of all.
i do not know that englishman alive with whom my soul is any jot at odds more than the infant that is born tonight i thank my god for my humility.
i would to god all strifes were well compounded.
my sovereign liege, i do beseech your majesty to take our brother clarence to your grace.
why, madam, have i offer'd love for this to be so bouted in this royal presence?
who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
you do him injury to scorn his corse.
who knows not he is dead!
who knows he is?
all seeing heaven, what a world is this!
look i so pale, lord dorset, as the rest?
ay, my good lord and no one in this presence but his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.
is clarence dead?
the order was reversed.
but he, poor soul, by your first order died, some tardy cripple bore the countermand, that came too lag to see him buried.
god grant that some, less noble and less loyal, nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood, deserve not worse than wretched clarence did, and yet go current from suspicion!
a boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
i pray thee, my soul is full of sorrow.
i will not rise, unless your highness grant.
then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.
the forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life who slew today a righteous gentleman lately attendant on the duke of norfolk.
have a tongue to doom my brother's death, and shall the same give pardon to a slave?
my brother slew no man his fault was thought, and yet his punishment was cruel death.
who sued to me for him?
who, in my rage, kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised who spake of brotherhood?
who spake of love?
who told me how the poor soul did forsake the mighty warwick, and did fight for me?
who told me, in the field by tewksbury when oxford had me down, he rescued me, and said, 'dear brother, live, and be a king'?
who told me, when we both lay in the field frozen almost to death, how he did lap me even in his own garments, and gave himself, all thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
all this from my remembrance brutish wrath sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you had so much grace to put it in my mind.
but when your carters or your waitingvassals have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced the precious image of our dear redeemer, you straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon and i unjustly too, must grant it you but for my brother not a man would speak, nor i, ungracious, speak unto myself for him, poor soul.
the proudest of you all have been beholding to him in his life yet none of you would once plead for his life.
o god, i fear thy justice will take hold on me, and you, and mine, and yours for this!
come, hastings, help me to my closet.
oh, poor clarence!
this is the fruit of rashness!
mark'd you not how that the guilty kindred of the queen look'd pale when they did hear of clarence' death?
o, they did urge it still unto the king!
god will revenge it.
but come, let us in, to comfort edward with our company.
we wait upon your grace.
tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?
no, boy.
why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast, and cry 'o clarence, my unhappy son!
' why do you look on us, and shake your head, and call us wretches, orphans, castaways if that our noble father be alive?
my pretty cousins, you mistake me much i do lament the sickness of the king.
as loath to lose him, not your father's death it were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead.
god will revenge it whom i will importune with daily prayers all to that effect.
and so will i.
peace, children, peace!
incapable and shallow innocents, you cannot guess who caused your father's death.
grandam, we can for my good uncle gloucester told me, the king, provoked by the queen, and when my uncle told me so, he wept, and hugg'd me in his arm, and kindly kiss'd my cheek bade me rely on him as on my father, and he would love me dearly as his child.
oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes, and with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile!
he is my son yea, and therein my shame yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
ay, boy.
i cannot think it.
hark!
what noise is this?
oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, to chide my fortune, and torment myself?
i'll join with black despair against my soul, and to myself become an enemy.
what means this scene of rude impatience?
edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
why grow the branches now the root is wither'd?
why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
if you will live, lament if die, be brief, that our swiftwinged souls may catch the king's or, like obedient subjects, follow him to his new kingdom of perpetual rest.
ah, so much interest have i in thy sorrow as i had title in thy noble husband!
i have bewept a worthy husband's death, but now two mirrors of his princely semblance are crack'd in pieces by malignant death, and i for comfort have but one false glass, which grieves me when i see my shame in him.
thou art a widow yet thou art a mother, but death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms, and pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs, edward and clarence.
o, what cause have i, thine being but a moiety of my grief, to overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!
good aunt, you wept not for our father's death how can we aid you with our kindred tears?
our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd your widowdolour likewise be unwept!
give me no help in lamentation i am not barren to bring forth complaints all springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, that i, being govern'd by the watery moon, may send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
oh for my husband, for my dear lord edward!
oh for our father, for our dear lord clarence!
alas for both, both mine, edward and clarence!
what stay had i but edward?
and he's gone.
what stay had we but clarence?
and he's gone.
what stays had i but they?
and they are gone.
was never widow had so dear a loss!
were never orphans had so dear a loss!
was never mother had so dear a loss!
alas, i am the mother of these moans!
their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.
she for an edward weeps, and so do i i for a clarence weep, these babes for clarence weep and so do i i for an edward weep, alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd, pour all your tears!
i am your sorrow's nurse, and i will pamper it with lamentations.
comfort, god is much displeased that you take with unthankfulness, in common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful, with dull unwilligness to repay a debt which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent much more to be thus opposite with heaven, for it requires the royal debt it lent you.
madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, send straight for him let him be crown'd drown desperate sorrow in dead edward's grave, and plant your joys in living edward's throne.
madam, all of us have cause to wail the dimming of our shining star but none can cure their harms by wailing them.
madam, my mother, i do cry you mercy humbly on my knee i crave your blessing.
god bless thee and put meekness in thy mind, love, charity, obedience, and true duty!
you cloudy princes and heartsorrowing peers, that bear this mutual heavy load of moan, now cheer each other in each other's love though we have spent our harvest of this king, we are to reap the harvest of his son.
the broken rancour of your highswoln hearts, but lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together, must gently be preserved, cherish'd, me seemeth good, that, with some little train, forthwith from ludlow the young prince be fetch'd hither to london, to be crown'd our king.
why with some little train, my lord of buckingham?
marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude, the newheal'd wound of malice should break out, which would be so much the more dangerous by how much the estate is green and yet ungovern' where every horse bears his commanding rein, and may direct his course as please himself, as well the fear of harm, as harm apparent, in my opinion, ought to be prevented.
i hope the king made peace with all of us and the compact is firm and true in me.
and so in me and so, i think, yet, since it is but green, it should be put to no apparent likelihood of breach, therefore i say with noble buckingham, that it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
and so say i.
then be it so and go we to determine who they shall be that straight shall post to ludlow.
madam, and you, my mother, will you go to give your censures in this weighty business?
with all our harts.
my lord, whoever journeys to the prince, for god's sake, let not us two be behind for, by the way, i'll sort occasion, as index to the story we late talk'd of, to part the queen's proud kindred from the king.
my other self, my counsel's consistory, my oracle, my prophet!
my dear cousin, i, like a child, will go by thy direction.
towards ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.
neighbour, whither away so fast?
i promise you, hear you the news abroad?
ay, that the king is dead.
bad news, by'r lady i fear, i fear 'twill prove a troublous world.
neighbours, god speed!
give you good morrow, sir.
doth this news hold of good king edward's death?
ay, sir, it is too true god help the while!
then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
no, no by god's good grace his son shall reign.
woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!
in him there is a hope of government, that in his nonage council under him, and in his full and ripen'd years himself, no doubt, shall then and till then govern well.
so stood the state when henry the sixth was crown'd in paris but at nine months old.
stood the state so?
no, no, good friends, god wot for then this land was famously enrich'd with politic grave counsel then the king had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.
why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
better it were they all came by the father, or by the father there were none at all for emulation now, who shall be nearest, will touch us all too near, if god prevent not.
o, full of danger is the duke of gloucester!
and the queen' and were they to be ruled, and not to rule, this sickly land might solace as before.
come, come, we fear the worst all shall be well.
when clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks when great leaves fall, the winter is at hand when the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
all may be well but, if god sort it so, 'tis more than we deserve, or i expect.
truly, ye cannot reason almost with a man that looks not heavily and full of fear.
before the times of change, by a divine instinct men's minds mistrust ensuing dangers as by proof, we see the waters swell before a boisterous storm.
but leave it all to god.
whither away?
marry, we were sent for to the justices.
i'll bear you company.
last night, i hear, they lay at northampton at stonystratford will they be to tomorrow, or next day, they will be here.
i hope he is much grown since last i saw him.
but i hear, no they say my son of york hath almost overta'en him in his growth.
ay, mother but i would not have it so.
why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.
grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper, my uncle rivers talk'd how i did grow 'ay,' quoth my uncle gloucester, 'small herbs have grace,' and since, methinks, i would not grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold in him that did object the same to thee he was the wretched'st thing when he was young, so long agrowing and so leisurely, that, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.
i hope he is but yet let mothers doubt.
now, by my troth, if i had been remember'd, i could have given my uncle's grace a flout, to touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.
how, my pretty york?
i pray thee, let me hear it.
marry, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw a crust at two hours old 'twas full two years ere i could get a tooth.
grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
i pray thee, pretty york, who told thee this?
grandam, his nurse.
his nurse!
why, she was dead ere thou wert born.
if 'twere not she, i cannot tell who told me.
go to, you are too shrewd.
good madam, be not angry with the child.
pitchers have ears.
here comes a messenger.
what news?
such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.
how fares the prince?
well, madam, and in health.
what is thy news then?
lord rivers and lord grey are sent to pomfret, with them sir thomas vaughan, prisoners.
who hath committed them?
the mighty dukes gloucester and buckingham.
for what offence?
the sum of all i can, i have disclosed why or for what these nobles were committed is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.
ay me, i see the downfall of our house!
the tiger now hath seized the gentle hind insulting tyranny begins to jet welcome, destruction, death, and massacre!
i see, as in a map, the end of all.
accursed and unquiet wrangling days, how many of you have mine eyes beheld!
my husband lost his life to get the crown and often up and down my sons were toss'd, and being seated, and domestic broils clean overblown, themselves, the conquerors.
make war upon themselves blood against blood, o, preposterous and frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen or let me die, to look on death no more!
come, come, my boy we will to sanctuary.
madam, farewell.
i'll go along with you.
you have no cause.
my gracious lady, go and thither bear your treasure and your goods.
for my part, i'll resign unto your grace and so betide to me as well i tender you and all of yours!
come, i'll conduct you to the sanctuary.
welcome, sweet prince, to london, to your chamber.
welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign the weary way hath made you melancholy.
no, uncle but our crosses on the way have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy i want more uncles here to welcome me.
sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years hath not yet dived into the world's deceit nor more can you distinguish of a man than of his outward show which, god he knows, seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
those uncles which you want were dangerous your grace attended to their sugar'd words, but look' god keep you from them, and from such false friends!
god keep me from false friends!
but they were none.
my lord, the mayor of london comes to greet you.
god bless your grace with health and happy days!
i thank you, good my lord and thank you all.
i thought my mother, and my brother york, would long ere this have met us on the way fie, what a slug is hastings, that he comes not to tell us whether they will come or no!
and, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.
welcome, what, will our mother come?
on what occasion, god he knows, not i, the queen your mother, and your brother york, the tender prince would fain have come with me to meet your grace, but by his mother was perforce withheld.
fie, what an indirect and peevish course is this of hers!
lord cardinal, will your grace persuade the queen to send the duke of york unto his princely brother presently?
if she deny, lord hastings, go with him, and from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
my lord of buckingham, if my weak oratory can from his mother win the duke of york, anon expect him here but if she be obdurate to mild entreaties, god in heaven forbid we should infringe the holy privilege of blessed sanctuary!
not for all this land would i be guilty of so deep a sin.
you are too senselessobstinate, my lord, too ceremonious and traditional weigh it but with the grossness of this age, you break not sanctuary in seizing him.
the benefit thereof is always granted to those whose dealings have deserved the place, this prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it and therefore, in mine opinion, then, taking him from thence that is not there, you break no privilege nor charter there.
oft have i heard of sanctuary men but sanctuary children ne'er till now.
my lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.
come on, lord hastings, will you go with me?
i go, my lord.
good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
say, uncle gloucester, if our brother come, where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
where it seems best unto your royal self.
if i may counsel you, some day or two then where you please, and shall be thought most fit for your best health and recreation.
i do not like the tower, of any place.
did julius caesar build that place, my lord?
he did, my gracious lord, begin that place which, since, succeeding ages have reedified.
is it upon record, or else reported successively from age to age, he built it?
upon record, my gracious lord.
but say, my lord, it were not register'd, methinks the truth should live from age to age, as 'twere retail'd to all posterity, even to the general allending day.
what say you, uncle?
i say, without characters, fame lives long.
thus, like the formal vice, iniquity, i moralize two meanings in one word.
that julius caesar was a famous man with what his valour did enrich his wit, his wit set down to make his valour live death makes no conquest of this conqueror for now he lives in fame, though not in life.
i'll tell you what, my cousin buckingham, what, my gracious lord?
an if i live until i be a man, i'll win our ancient right in france again, or die a soldier, as i lived a king.
now, in good time, here comes the duke of york.
richard of york!
how fares our loving brother?
well, my dread lord so must i call you now.
ay, brother, to our grief, too late he died that might have kept that title, which by his death hath lost much majesty.
how fares our cousin, noble lord of york?
i thank you, gentle uncle.
o, my lord, you said that idle weeds are fast in growth the prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
he hath, my lord.
and therefore is he idle?
o, my fair cousin, i must not say so.
then is he more beholding to you than i.
he may command me as my sovereign but you have power in me as in a kinsman.
i pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
my dagger, little cousin?
with all my heart.
a beggar, brother?
of my kind uncle, that i know will give and being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
a greater gift than that i'll give my cousin.
a greater gift!
o, that's the sword to it.
a gentle cousin, were it light enough.
o, then, i see, you will part but with light gifts in weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.
it is too heavy for your grace to wear.
i weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
what, would you have my weapon, little lord?
i would, that i might thank you as you call me.
how?
little.
uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.
you mean, to bear me, uncle, my brother mocks both you and me because that i am little, like an ape, he thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
with what a sharpprovided wit he reasons!
to mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, so cunning and so young is wonderful.
my lord, will't please you pass along?
myself and my good cousin buckingham will to your mother, to entreat of her to meet you at the tower and welcome you.
what, will you go unto the tower, my lord?
my lord protector needs will have it so.
i shall not sleep in quiet at the tower.
why, what should you fear?
marry, my uncle clarence' my grandam told me he was murdered there.
i fear no uncles dead.
nor none that live, i hope.
an if they live, i hope i need not fear.
but come, my lord and with a heavy heart, thinking on them, go i unto the tower.
think you, my lord, this little prating york was not incensed by his subtle mother to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
no doubt, no doubt o, 'tis a parlous boy bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable he is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
well, let them rest.
come hither, catesby.
thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way what think'st thou?
is it not an easy matter to make william lord hastings of our mind, for the instalment of this noble duke in the seat royal of this famous isle?
he for his father's sake so loves the prince, that he will not be won to aught against him.
what think'st thou, then, of stanley?
what will he?
he will do all in all as hastings doth.
well, then, go, gentle catesby, and, as it were far off sound thou lord hastings, how doth he stand affected to our purpose and summon him tomorrow to the tower, to sit about the coronation.
if thou dost find him tractable to us, encourage him, if he be leaden, icycold, unwilling, be thou so too and so break off your talk, for we tomorrow hold divided councils, wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.
tell him, catesby, his ancient knot of dangerous adversaries tomorrow are let blood at pomfretcastle and bid my friend, for joy of this good news, give mistress shore one gentle kiss the more.
good catesby, go, effect this business soundly.
my good lords both, with all the heed i may.
shall we hear from you, catesby, ere we sleep?
you shall, my lord.
at crosby place, there shall you find us both.
now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive lord hastings will not yield to our complots?
chop off his head, man and, look, when i am king, claim thou of me the earldom of hereford, and the moveables whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.
i'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.
and look to have it yielded with all willingness.
come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards we may digest our complots in some form.
what, ho!
my lord!
a messenger from the lord stanley.
what is't o'clock?
upon the stroke of four.
cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?
so it should seem by that i have to say.
first, he commends him to your noble lordship.
and then?
and then he sends you word he dreamt to besides, he says there are two councils held and that may be determined at the one which may make you and him to rue at the other.
therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure, if presently you will take horse with him, and with all speed post with him toward the north, to shun the danger that his soul divines.
go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord bid him not fear the separated councils his honour and myself are at the one, and at the other is my servant catesby where nothing can proceed that toucheth us whereof i shall not have intelligence.
tell him his fears are shallow, and for his dreams, i wonder he is so fond to trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers to fly the boar before the boar pursues, were to incense the boar to follow us and make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
go, bid thy master rise and come to me and we will both together to the tower, where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
my gracious lord, i'll tell him what you say.
many good morrows to my noble lord!
good morrow, catesby you are early stirring what news, what news, in this our tottering state?
it is a reeling world, indeed, my lord and i believe twill never stand upright tim richard wear the garland of the realm.
how!
wear the garland!
dost thou mean the crown?
ay, my good lord.
i'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders ere i will see the crown so foul misplaced.
but canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
ay, on my life and hopes to find forward and thereupon he sends you this good news, that this same very day your enemies, the kindred of the queen, must die at pomfret.
indeed, i am no mourner for that news, but, that i'll give my voice on richard's side, to bar my master's heirs in true descent, god knows i will not do it, to the death.
god keep your lordship in that gracious mind!
but i shall laugh at this a twelvemonth hence, that they who brought me in my master's hate i live to look upon their tragedy.
i tell thee, catesby what, my lord?
ere a fortnight make me elder, i'll send some packing that yet think not on it.
'tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, when men are unprepared and look not for it.
o monstrous, monstrous!
and so falls it out with rivers, vaughan, and so 'twill do with some men else, who think themselves as safe as thou and i who, as thou know'st, are dear to princely richard and to buckingham.
the princes both make high account of you for they account his head upon the bridge.
i know they do and i have well deserved it.
come on, come on where is your boarspear, man?
fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
my lord, good morrow good morrow, you may jest on, but, by the holy rood, i do not like these several councils, i.
my lord, i hold my life as dear as you do yours and never in my life, i do protest, was it more precious to me than ' think you, but that i know our state secure, i would be so triumphant as i am?
the lords at pomfret, when they rode from london, were jocund, and supposed their state was sure, and they indeed had no cause to mistrust but yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast.
pray god, i say, i prove a needless coward!
what, shall we toward the tower?
the day is spent.
come, come, have with you.
wot you what, my lord?
today the lords you talk of are beheaded.
they, for their truth, might better wear their heads than some that have accused them wear their hats.
but come, my lord, let us away.
go on before i'll talk with this good fellow.
how now, sirrah!
how goes the world with thee?
the better that your lordship please to ask.
i tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now then was i going prisoner to the tower, by the suggestion of the queen's allies but now, i tell theekeep it to thyself this day those enemies are put to death, and i in better state than e'er i was.
god hold it, to your honour's good content!
gramercy, there, drink that for me.
god save your lordship!
well met, my lord i am glad to see your honour.
i thank thee, good sir john, with all my heart.
i am in your debt for your last exercise come the next sabbath, and i will content you.
what, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
your friends at pomfret, they do need the priest your honour hath no shriving work in hand.
good faith, and when i met this holy man, those men you talk of came into my mind.
what, go you toward the tower?
i do, my lord but long i shall not stay i shall return before your lordship thence.
'tis like enough, for i stay dinner there.
i'll wait upon your lordship.
come, bring forth the prisoners.
sir richard ratcliff, today shalt thou behold a subject die for truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
god keep the prince from all the pack of you!
a knot you are of damned bloodsuckers!
you live that shall cry woe for this after.
dispatch the limit of your lives is out.
o pomfret, pomfret!
o thou bloody prison, fatal and ominous to noble peers!
within the guilty closure of thy walls richard the second here was hack'd to death and, for more slander to thy dismal seat, we give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
now margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads, for standing by when richard stabb'd her son.
then cursed she hastings, then cursed she buckingham, then cursed she richard.
o, remember, god to hear her prayers for them, as now for us and for my sister and her princely sons, be satisfied, dear god, with our true blood, which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
make haste the hour of death is expiate.
come, grey, come, vaughan, and take our leave, until we meet in heaven.
my lords, the cause why we are met is, to determine of the coronation.
in god's name, when is the royal day?
are all things fitting for that royal time?
it is, and wants but nomination.
tomorrow, then, i judge a happy day.
who knows the lord protector's mind herein?
who is most inward with the royal duke?
your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
who, i, my lord i we know each other's faces, but for our hearts, he knows no more of mine, than i of yours nor i no more of his, than you of mine.
lord hastings, you and he are near in love.
i thank his grace, i know he loves me well but, for his purpose in the coronation.
i have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd but you, my noble lords, may name the time and in the duke's behalf i'll give my voice, which, i presume, he'll take in gentle part.
now in good time, here comes the duke himself.
my noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
i have been long a sleeper but, i hope, my absence doth neglect no great designs, which by my presence might have been concluded.
had not you come upon your cue, my lord william lord hastings had pronounced your part, i mean, your voice,for crowning of the king.
than my lord hastings no man might be bolder his lordship knows me well, and loves me well.
i thank your grace.
my lord of ely!
my lord?
when i was last in holborn, i saw good strawberries in your garden there i do beseech you send for some of them.
marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.
cousin of buckingham, a word with you.
catesby hath sounded hastings in our business, and finds the testy gentleman so hot, as he will lose his head ere give consent his master's son, as worshipful as he terms it, shall lose the royalty of england's throne.
withdraw you hence, my lord, i'll follow you.
we have not yet set down this day of triumph.
tomorrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden for i myself am not so well provided as else i would be, were the day prolong'd.
where is my lord protector?
i have sent for these strawberries.
his grace looks cheerfully and smooth today there's some conceit or other likes him well, when he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
i think there's never a man in christendom that can less hide his love or hate than he for by his face straight shall you know his heart.
what of his heart perceive you in his face by any likelihood he show'd today?
marry, that with no man here he is offended for, were he, he had shown it in his looks.
i pray god he be not, i say.
i pray you all, tell me what they deserve that do conspire my death with devilish plots of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd upon my body with their hellish charms?
the tender love i bear your grace, my lord, makes me most forward in this noble presence to doom the offenders, whatsoever they be i say, my lord, they have deserved death.
see how i am bewitch'd behold mine arm is, like a blasted sapling, wither' and this is edward's wife, that monstrous witch, consorted with that harlot strumpet shore, that by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
if they have done this thing, my gracious lord if i thou protector of this damned strumpet tellest thou me of 'ifs'?
off with his head!
now, by saint paul i swear, i will not dine until i see the same.
lovel and ratcliff, the rest, that love me, rise and follow me.
woe, woe for england!
not a whit for me for i, too fond, might have prevented this.
stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm but i disdain'd it, three times today my footcloth horse did stumble, and startled, when he look'd upon the tower, as loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.
o, i now repent i told the pursuivant as 'twere triumphing at mine enemies, how they at pomfret bloodily were butcher'd, and i myself secure in grace and favour.
o margaret, margaret, now thy heavy curse is lighted on poor hastings' wretched head!
dispatch, my lord make a short shrift he longs to see your head.
o momentary grace of mortal men, which we more hunt for than the grace of god!
who builds his hopes in air of your good looks, lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, ready, with every nod, to tumble down into the fatal bowels of the deep.
come, come, dispatch 'tis bootless to exclaim.
o bloody richard!
miserable england!
i prophesy the fearful'st time to thee that ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
come, lead me to the block bear him my head.
they smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour, murder thy breath in the middle of a word, and then begin again, and stop again, as if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
tut, i can counterfeit the deep tragedian speak and look back, and pry on every side, tremble and start at wagging of a straw, ghastly looks are at my service, like enforced smiles and both are ready in their offices, at any time, to grace my stratagems.
but what, is catesby gone?
he is and, see, he brings the mayor along.
lord mayor, look to the drawbridge there!
hark!
a drum.
catesby, o'erlook the walls.
lord mayor, the reason we have sent look back, defend thee, here are enemies.
god and our innocency defend and guard us!
be patient, they are friends, ratcliff and lovel.
here is the head of that ignoble traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.
so dear i loved the man, that i must weep.
i took him for the plainest harmless creature that breathed upon this earth a christian made him my book wherein my soul recorded so smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue, that, his apparent open guilt omitted, i mean, his conversation with shore's wife, he lived from all attainder of suspect.
well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor that ever lived.
would you imagine, or almost believe, were't not that, by great preservation, we live to tell it you, the subtle traitor this day had plotted, in the councilhouse to murder me and my good lord of gloucester?
what, had he so?
what, think you we are turks or infidels?
or that we would, against the form of law, proceed thus rashly to the villain's death, but that the extreme peril of the case, the peace of england and our persons' safety, enforced us to this execution?
now, fair befall you!
he deserved his death and you my good lords, both have well proceeded, to warn false traitors from the like attempts.
i never look'd for better at his hands, after he once fell in with mistress shore.
yet had not we determined he should die, until your lordship came to see his death which now the loving haste of these our friends, somewhat against our meaning, because, my lord, we would have had you heard the traitor speak, and timorously confess the manner and the purpose of his treason that you might well have signified the same unto the citizens, who haply may misconstrue us in him and wail his death.
but, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve, as well as i had seen and heard him speak and doubt you not, right noble princes both, but i'll acquaint our duteous citizens with all your just proceedings in this cause.
and to that end we wish'd your lordship here, to avoid the carping censures of the world.
but since you come too late of our intents, and so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.
go, after, after, cousin buckingham.
there, at your meet'st advantage of the time, infer the bastardy of edward' tell them how edward put to death a citizen, only for saying he would make his son heir to the crown meaning indeed his house, which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
moreover, urge his hateful luxury and bestial appetite in change of lust which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, even where his lustful eye or savage heart, without control, listed to make his prey.
nay, for a need, tell them, when that my mother went with child of that unsatiate edward, noble york my princely father then had wars in france and, by just computation of the time, found that the issue was not his begot which well appeared in his lineaments, but touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off, because you know, my lord, my mother lives.
fear not, my lord, i'll play the orator as if the golden fee for which i plead and so, my lord, adieu.
if you thrive well, bring them to baynard's castle where you shall find me well accompanied with reverend fathers and welllearned bishops.
and towards three or four o'clock look for the news that the guildhall affords.
go, lovel, with all speed to doctor shaw go thou to friar penker bid them both meet me within this hour at baynard's castle.
now will i in, to take some privy order, to draw the brats of clarence out of sight and to give notice, that no manner of person at any time have recourse unto the princes.
this is the indictment of the good lord hastings which in a set hand fairly is engross'd, that it may be this day read over in paul's.
eleven hours i spent to write it over, for yesternight by catesby was it brought me the precedent was full as long a and yet within these five hours lived lord hastings, untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty here's a good world the while!
why who's so gross, that seeth not this palpable device?
yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not?
bad is the world and all will come to nought, when such bad dealings must be seen in thought.
how now, my lord, what say the citizens?
now, by the holy mother of our lord, the citizens are mum and speak not a word.
touch'd you the bastardy of edward's children?
i did with his contract with lady lucy, and his contract by deputy in france the insatiate greediness of his desires, and his enforcement of the city wives his tyranny for trifles his own bastardy, as being got, your father then in france, his resemblance, being not like the duke withal i did infer your lineaments, being the right idea of your father, both in your form and nobleness of mind laid open all your victories in scotland, your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace, your bounty, virtue, indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse and when mine oratory grew to an end i bid them that did love their country's good cry 'god save richard, england's royal king!
' ah!
and did they so?
no, so god help me, they spake not a word but, like dumb statues or breathing stones, gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
which when i saw, i reprehended them and ask' his answer was, the people were not wont to be spoke to but by the recorder.
then he was urged to tell my tale again, 'thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd' but nothing spake in warrant from himself.
when he had done, some followers of mine own, at the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps, and some ten voices cried 'god save king richard!
' and thus i took the vantage of those few, 'thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth i 'this general applause and loving shout ' and even here brake off, and came away.
what tongueless blocks were they!
would not they speak?
no, by my troth, my lord.
will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
intend some fear be not you spoke with, and look you get a prayerbook in your hand, and stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord for on that ground i' play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.
i go and if you plead as well for them as i can say nay to thee for myself, no doubt well bring it to a happy issue.
go, go, up to the leads the lord mayor knocks.
welcome my lord i dance attendance here i think the duke will not be spoke withal.
how now, catesby, what says he?
he doth entreat your grace to visit him to he is within, with two right reverend fathers, divinely bent to meditation and no worldly suit would he be moved, to draw him from his holy exercise.
return, good catesby, to thy lord again tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens, in deep designs and matters of great moment, no less importing than our general good, are come to have some conference with his grace.
i'll tell him what you say, my lord.
ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an edward!
he is not lolling on a lewd daybed, but on his knees at meditation not dallying with a brace of courtezans, but meditating with two deep divines not sleeping, to engross his idle body, but praying, happy were england, would this gracious prince but, sure, i fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.
marry, god forbid his grace should say us nay!
i fear he will.
how now, catesby, what says your lord?
my lord, he wonders to what end you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him, his grace not being warn' my lord, he fears you mean no good to him.
sorry i am my noble cousin should suspect me, by heaven, i come in perfect love to him and so once more return and tell his grace.
when holy and devout religious men are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence, so sweet is zealous contemplation.
see, where he stands between two clergymen!
two props of virtue for a christian prince, and, see, a book of prayer in his hand, true ornaments to know a holy man.
famous plantagenet, most gracious prince, lend favourable ears to our request and pardon us the interruption of thy devotion and right christian zeal.
my lord, i rather do beseech you pardon me, who, earnest in the service of my god, neglect the visitation of my friends.
but, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?
even that, i hope, which pleaseth god above, and all good men of this ungovern'd isle.
i do suspect i have done some offence that seems disgracious in the city's eyes, and that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
you have, would it might please your grace, at our entreaties, to amend that fault!
else wherefore breathe i in a christian land?
then know, it is your fault that you resign the supreme seat, the throne majestical, the scepter'd office of your ancestors, your state of fortune and your due of birth, the lineal glory of your royal house, whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, which here we waken to our country's good, this noble isle doth want her proper limbs her face defaced with scars of infamy, her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, and almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
which to recure, we heartily solicit your gracious self to take on you the charge and kingly government of this your land, not as protector, steward, substitute, or lowly factor for another's gain but as successively from blood to blood, your right of birth, your empery, your own.
for this, consorted with the citizens, your very worshipful and loving friends, and by their vehement instigation, in this just suit come i to move your grace.
i know not whether to depart in silence, or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
best fitteth my degree or your condition if not to answer, you might haply think tonguetied ambition, not replying, yielded to bear the golden yoke of sovereignty, which fondly you would here impose on me if to reprove you for this suit of yours, so season'd with your faithful love to me.
then, on the other side, i cheque'd my friends.
therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, and then, in speaking, not to incur the last, definitively thus i answer you.
your love deserves my thanks but my desert unmeritable shuns your high request.
first if all obstacles were cut away, and that my path were even to the crown, as my ripe revenue and due by birth yet so much is my poverty of spirit, so mighty and so many my defects, as i had rather hide me from my greatness, being a bark to brook no mighty sea, than in my greatness covet to be hid, and in the vapour of my glory smother'd.
but, god be thank'd, there's no need of me, and much i need to help you, if need were the royal tree hath left us royal fruit, which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time, will well become the seat of majesty, and make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
on him i lay what you would lay on me, the right and fortune of his happy stars which god defend that i should wring from him!
my lord, this argues conscience in your grace but the respects thereof are nice and trivial, all circumstances well considered.
you say that edward is your brother' so say we too, but not by edward's wife for first he was contract to lady lucy your mother lives a witness to that vow and afterward by substitute betroth'd to bona, sister to the king of france.
these both put by a poor petitioner, a carecrazed mother of a many children, a beautywaning and distressed widow, even in the afternoon of her best days, made prize and purchase of his lustful eye, seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts to base declension and loathed bigamy by her, in his unlawful bed, he got this edward, whom our manners term the prince.
more bitterly could i expostulate, save that, for reverence to some alive, i give a sparing limit to my tongue.
then, good my lord, take to your royal self this proffer'd benefit of dignity if non to bless us and the land withal, yet to draw forth your noble ancestry from the corruption of abusing times, unto a lineal truederived course.
do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.
refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.
o, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
i am unfit for state and majesty i do beseech you, take it not amiss i cannot nor i will not yield to you.
if you refuse it,as, in love and zeal, loath to depose the child, your brother's son as well we know your tenderness of heart and gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, which we have noted in you to your kin, and egally indeed to all estates, yet whether you accept our suit or no, your brother's son shall never reign our king but we will plant some other in the throne, and in this resolution here we leave you.
come, 'zounds!
i'll entreat no more.
o, do not swear, my lord of buckingham.
call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.
do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it.
would you enforce me to a world of care?
well, call them again.
i am not made of stone, but penetrable to your.
kind entreats, albeit against my conscience and my soul.
cousin of buckingham, and you sage, grave men, since you will buckle fortune on my back, to bear her burthen, whether i will or no, but if black scandal or foulfaced reproach attend the sequel of your imposition, your mere enforcement shall acquittance me from all the impure blots and stains thereof for god he knows, and you may partly see, how far i am from the desire thereof.
god bless your grace!
we see it, and will say it.
in saying so, you shall but say the truth.
long live richard, england's royal king!
amen.
tomorrow will it please you to be crown'd?
even when you please, since you will have it so.
tomorrow, then, and so most joyfully we take our leave.
come, let us to our holy task again.
farewell, good cousin farewell, gentle friends.
who meets us here?
my niece plantagenet led in the hand of her kind aunt of gloucester?
now, for my life, she's wandering to the tower, on pure heart's love to greet the tender princes.
daughter, well met.
god give your graces both a happy and a joyful time of day!
as much to you, good sister!
whither away?
no farther than the tower and, as i guess, upon the like devotion as yourselves, to gratulate the gentle princes there.
kind sister, we'll enter all together.
and, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, how doth the prince, and my young son of york?
right well, dear madam.
by your patience, i may not suffer you to visit them the king hath straitly charged the contrary.
the king!
why, who's that?
i mean the lord protector.
the lord protect him from that kingly title!
hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
i am their mother who should keep me from them?
i am their fathers mother i will see them.
their aunt i am in law, then bring me to their sights i'll bear thy blame and take thy office from thee, on my peril.
no, madam, no i am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence, and i'll salute your grace of york as mother, and reverend looker on, of two fair queens.
come, madam, you must straight to westminster, there to be crowned richard's royal queen.
o, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart may have some scope to beat, or else i swoon with this deadkilling news!
despiteful tidings!
o unpleasing news!
mother, how fares your grace?
o dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence!
death and destruction dog thee at the heels thy mother's name is ominous to children.
if thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas, and live with richmond, from the reach of hell go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse, lest thou increase the number of the dead and make me die the thrall of margaret's curse, nor mother, wife, nor england's counted queen.
full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
take all the swift advantage of the hours you shall have letters from me to my son to meet you on the way, and welcome you.
be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
o illdispersing wind of misery!
o my accursed womb, the bed of death!
a cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world, whose unavoided eye is murderous.
come, madam, come i in all haste was sent.
and i in all unwillingness will go.
i would to god that the inclusive verge of golden metal that must round my brow were redhot steel, to sear me to the brain!
anointed let me be with deadly venom, and die, ere men can say, god save the queen!
go, go, poor soul, i envy not thy glory to feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.
why?
when he that is my husband now came to me, as i follow'd henry's corse, when scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands which issued from my other angel husband and that dead saint which then i weeping follow'd o, when, i say, i look'd on richard's face, 'be thou,' quoth i, ' accursed, for making me, so young, so old a widow!
and, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed and be thy wifeif any be so mad as miserable by the life of thee as thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!
lo, ere i can repeat this curse again, even in so short a space, my woman's heart grossly grew captive to his honey words and proved the subject of my own soul's curse, which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest for never yet one hour in his bed have i enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep, but have been waked by his timorous dreams.
besides, he hates me for my father warwick and will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
poor heart, adieu!
i pity thy complaining.
no more than from my soul i mourn for yours.
farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!
adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!
stay, yet look back with me unto the tower.
pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes whom envy hath immured within your walls!
rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow for tender princes, use my babies well!
so foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.
stand all apart cousin of buckingham!
my gracious sovereign?
give me thy hand.
thus high, by thy advice and thy assistance, is king richard seated but shall we wear these honours for a day?
or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
still live they and for ever may they last!
o buckingham, now do i play the touch, to try if thou be current gold indeed think now what i would say.
say on, my loving lord.
why, buckingham, i say, i would be king, why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.
am i king?
' but edward lives.
true, noble prince.
o bitter consequence, that edward still should live!
'true, noble prince!
' cousin, shall i be plain?
i wish the bastards dead and i would have it suddenly perform'd.
what sayest thou?
speak suddenly be brief.
your grace may do your pleasure.
tut, tut, thou art all ice, say, have i thy consent that they shall die?
give me some breath, some little pause, my lord i will resolve your grace immediately.
i will converse with ironwitted fools none are for me highreaching buckingham grows circumspect.
boy!
my lord?
know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold would tempt unto a close exploit of death?
my lord, i know a discontented gentleman, gold were as good as twenty orators, and will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.
what is his name?
his name, my lord, is tyrrel.
go, call him hither.
the deeprevolving witty buckingham hath he so long held out with me untired, and stops he now for breath?
how now!
what news with you?
my lord, i hear the marquis dorset's fled to richmond, in those parts beyond the sea where he abides.
catesby!
my lord?
rumour it abroad that anne, my wife, i will take order for her keeping close.
inquire me out some meanborn gentleman, whom i will marry straight to clarence' the boy is foolish, and i fear not him.
look, how thou dream'st!
i say again, give out about it for it stands me much upon, to stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
i must be married to my brother's daughter, or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
murder her brothers, and then marry her!
uncertain way of gain!
but i am in tearfalling pity dwells not in this eye.
is thy name tyrrel?
james tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
art thou, indeed?
prove me, my gracious sovereign.
darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
ay, my lord but i had rather kill two enemies.
why, two deep enemies, foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers tyrrel, i mean those bastards in the tower.
let me have open means to come to them, and soon i'll rid you from the fear of them.
thou sing'st sweet music.
hark, come hither, tyrrel go, rise, say it is done, and i will love thee, and prefer thee too.
'tis done, my gracious lord.
shall we hear from thee, tyrrel, ere we sleep?
ye shall, my lord.
my lord, i have consider'd in my mind the late demand that you did sound me in.
well, let that pass.
dorset is fled to richmond.
i hear that news, my lord.
stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.
my lord, i claim your gift, my due by promise, for which your honour and your faith is pawn'd the earldom of hereford and the moveables the which you promised i should possess.
stanley, look to your wife if she convey letters to richmond, you shall answer it.
what says your highness to my just demand?
as i remember, henry the sixth did prophesy that richmond should be king, when richmond was a little peevish boy.
a king, perhaps, perhaps, my lord!
how chance the prophet could not at that time have told me, i being by, that i should kill him?
my lord, your promise for the earldom, richmond!
when last i was at exeter, the mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle, and call' at which name i started, because a bard of ireland told me once i should not live long after i saw richmond.
my lord!
ay, what's o'clock?
i am thus bold to put your grace in mind of what you promised me.
well, but what's o'clock?
upon the stroke of ten.
well, let it strike.
why let it strike?
because that, like a jack, thou keep'st the stroke betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
i am not in the giving vein today.
why, then resolve me whether you will or no.
tut, tut, thou troublest me am not in the vein.
is it even so?
rewards he my true service with such deep contempt made i him king for this?
o, let me think on hastings, and be gone to brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
the tyrannous and bloody deed is done.
the most arch of piteous massacre that ever yet this land was guilty of.
dighton and forrest, whom i did suborn to do this ruthless piece of butchery, although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs, melting with tenderness and kind compassion wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories.
'lo, thus' quoth dighton, '' 'thus, thus,' quoth forrest, 'girdling one another their lips were four red roses on a stalk, which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
a book of prayers on their pillow lay which once,' quoth forrest, 'almost changed my mind but o!
the devil'there the villain stopp'd 'we smothered the most replenished sweet work of nature, that from the prime creation e'er she framed.
' thus both are gone with conscience and remorse they could not speak and so i left them both, to bring this tidings to the bloody king.
and here he comes.
all hail, my sovereign liege!
kind tyrrel, am i happy in thy news?
if to have done the thing you gave in charge beget your happiness, be happy then, for it is done, my lord.
but didst thou see them dead?
i did, my lord.
and buried, gentle tyrrel?
the chaplain of the tower hath buried them but how or in what place i do not know.
come to me, tyrrel, soon at after supper, and thou shalt tell the process of their death.
meantime, but think how i may do thee good, and be inheritor of thy desire.
farewell till soon.
the son of clarence have i pent up close his daughter meanly have i match'd in marriage the sons of edward sleep in abraham's bosom, and anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
now, for i know the breton richmond aims at young elizabeth, my brother's daughter, and, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown, to her i go, a jolly thriving wooer.
my lord!
good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?
bad news, ely is fled to richmond and buckingham, back'd with the hardy welshmen, is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
ely with richmond troubles me more near than buckingham and his rashlevied army.
come, i have heard that fearful commenting is leaden servitor to dull delay delay leads impotent and snailpaced beggary then fiery expedition be my wing, jove's mercury, and herald for a king!
come, my counsel is my shield we must be brief when traitors brave the field.
so, now prosperity begins to mellow and drop into the rotten mouth of death.
here in these confines slily have i lurk'd, to watch the waning of mine adversaries.
a dire induction am i witness to, and will to france, hoping the consequence will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
withdraw thee, who comes here?
ah, my young princes!
ah, my tender babes!
my unblown flowers, newappearing sweets!
if yet your gentle souls fly in the air and be not fix'd in doom perpetual, hover about me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lamentation!
hover about her say, that right for right hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.
so many miseries have crazed my voice, that my woewearied tongue is mute and dumb, edward plantagenet, why art thou dead?
plantagenet doth quit plantagenet.
edward for edward pays a dying debt.
wilt thou, o god, fly from such gentle lambs, and throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
when didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
when holy harry died, and my sweet son.
blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost, woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd, brief abstract and record of tedious days, rest thy unrest on england's lawful earth, unlawfully made drunk with innocents' blood!
o, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave as thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
then would i hide my bones, not rest them here.
o, who hath any cause to mourn but i?
if ancient sorrow be most reverend, give mine the benefit of seniory, and let my woes frown on the upper hand.
if sorrow can admit society, tell o' i had an edward, till a richard kill'd him i had a harry, till a richard kill' thou hadst an edward, till a richard kill'd him thou hadst a richard, till a richard killed him i had a richard too, and thou didst kill him i had a rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.
thou hadst a clarence too, and richard kill'd him.
from forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept a hell that dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, to worry lambs and lap their gentle blood, that foul defacer of god's handiwork, that excellent grand tyrant of the earth, that reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls, thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
o upright, just, and truedisposing god, how do i thank thee, that this carnal cur preys on the issue of his mother's body, and makes her pewfellow with others' moan!
o harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
god witness with me, i have wept for thine.
bear with me i am hungry for revenge, and now i cloy me with beholding it.
thy edward he is dead, that stabb' thy other edward dead, to quit my edward young york he is but boot, because both they thy clarence he is dead that kill'd my edward and the beholders of this tragic play, the adulterate hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey, untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer, only reserved their factor, to buy souls but at hand, at hand, earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
to have him suddenly convey'd away.
cancel his bond of life, dear god, i prey, that i may live to say, the dog is dead!
o, thou didst prophesy the time would come that i should wish for thee to help me curse that bottled spider, that foul bunchback'd toad!
i call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune i call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen the presentation of but what i was the flattering index of a direful pageant one heaved ahigh, to be hurl'd down below a mother only mock'd with two sweet babes a dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble, a sign of dignity, a garish flag, to be the aim of every dangerous shot, a queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
where is thy husband now?
where be thy brothers?
where are thy children?
wherein dost thou, joy?
who sues to thee and cries 'god save the queen'?
where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee?
where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee?
decline all this, for happy wife, a most distressed widow for joyful mother, one that wails the name for queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care for one being sued to, one that humbly sues for one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me for one being fear'd of all, now fearing one for one commanding all, obey'd of none.
thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about, and left thee but a very prey to time having no more but thought of what thou wert, to torture thee the more, being what thou art.
thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke from which even here i slip my weary neck, and leave the burthen of it all on thee.
farewell, york's wife, these english woes will make me smile in france.
o thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile, and teach me how to curse mine enemies!
forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days compare dead happiness with living woe think that thy babes were fairer than they were, revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
my words are dull o, quicken them with thine!
thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.
why should calamity be full of words?
windy attorneys to their client woes, airy succeeders of intestate joys, poor breathing orators of miseries!
though what they do impart help not all, yet do they ease the heart.
if so, then be not tongue go with me.
and in the breath of bitter words let's smother my damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.
be copious in exclaims.
who intercepts my expedition?
o, she that might have intercepted thee, by strangling thee in her accursed womb from all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown, where should be graven, if that right were right, the slaughter of the prince that owed that crown, and the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?
thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother clarence?
and little ned plantagenet, his son?
where is kind hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey?
a flourish, trumpets!
strike alarum, drums!
let not the heavens hear these telltale women rail on the lord' strike, i say!
either be patient, and entreat me fair, or with the clamorous report of war thus will i drown your exclamations.
art thou my son?
ay, i thank god, my father, and yourself.
then patiently hear my impatience.
madam, i have a touch of your condition, which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
o, let me speak!
but i'll not hear.
i will be mild and gentle in my speech.
and brief, good mother for i am in haste.
art thou so hasty?
i have stay'd for thee, god knows, in anguish, pain and agony.
and came i not at last to comfort you?
no, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well, thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
a grievous burthen was thy birth to me tetchy and wayward was thy infancy thy schooldays frightful, desperate, wild, and furious, thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous, thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody, treacherous, more mild, but yet more harmful, what comfortable hour canst thou name, that ever graced me in thy company?
faith, none, but humphrey hour, that call'd your grace to breakfast once forth of my company.
if i be so disgracious in your sight, let me march on, and not offend your grace.
strike the drum.
i prithee, hear me speak.
you speak too bitterly.
hear me a word for i shall never speak to thee again.
either thou wilt die, by god's just ordinance, ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, or i with grief and extreme age shall perish and never look upon thy face again.
therefore take with thee my most heavy curse which, in the day of battle, tire thee more than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
my prayers on the adverse party fight and there the little souls of edward's children whisper the spirits of thine enemies and promise them success and victory.
bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse abides in me i say amen to all.
stay, madam i must speak a word with you.
i have no more sons of the royal blood for my daughters, richard, they shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens and therefore level not to hit their lives.
you have a daughter call'd elizabeth, virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
and must she die for this?
o, let her live, and i'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty slander myself as false to edward's bed so she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter, i will confess she was not edward's daughter.
wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.
to save her life, i'll say she is not so.
her life is only safest in her birth.
and only in that safety died her brothers.
lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
no, to their lives bad friends were contrary.
all unavoided is the doom of destiny.
true, my babes were destined to a fairer death, if grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.
you speak as if that i had slain my cousins.
cousins, indeed and by their uncle cozen'd of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts, thy head, all indirectly, no doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt till it was whetted on thy stonehard heart, to revel in the entrails of my lambs.
but that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, my tongue should to thy ears not name my boys till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes and i, in such a desperate bay of death, like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft, rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
madam, so thrive i in my enterprise and dangerous success of bloody wars, as i intend more good to you and yours, than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!
what good is cover'd with the face of heaven, to be discover'd, that can do me good?
the advancement of your children, gentle lady.
up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?
no, to the dignity and height of honour the high imperial type of this earth's glory.
flatter my sorrows with report of it tell me what state, what dignity, what honour, canst thou demise to any child of mine?
even all i have yea, and myself and all, will i withal endow a child of thine so in the lethe of thy angry soul thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs which thou supposest i have done to thee.
be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
then know, that from my soul i love thy daughter.
my daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.
what do you think?
so from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers and from my heart's love i do thank thee for it.
i mean, that with my soul i love thy daughter, and mean to make her queen of england.
say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
even he that makes her queen who should be else?
what, thou?
i, what think you of it, madam?
how canst thou woo her?
that would i learn of you, as one that are best acquainted with her humour.
and wilt thou learn of me?
madam, with all my heart.
send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, a pair of bleedinghearts thereon engrave edward and york therefore present to heras sometime margaret did to thy father, steep'd in rutland's blood, a handkerchief which, say to her, did drain the purple sap from her sweet brother's body and bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
if this inducement force her not to love, send her a story of thy noble acts tell her thou madest away her uncle clarence, her uncle rivers yea, and, for her sake, madest quick conveyance with her good aunt anne.
come, come, you mock me this is not the way to win our daughter.
there is no other way unless thou couldst put on some other shape, and not be richard that hath done all this.
say that i did all this for love of her.
nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
look, men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes, which after hours give leisure to repent.
if i did take the kingdom from your sons, to make amends, ill give it to your daughter.
if i have kill'd the issue of your womb, to quicken your increase, i will beget mine issue of your blood upon your daughter a grandam's name is little less in love than is the doting title of a mother they are as children but one step below, even of your mettle, of your very blood of an one pain, save for a night of groans endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
your children were vexation to your youth, but mine shall be a comfort to your age.
the loss you have is but a son being king, and by that loss your daughter is made queen.
i cannot make you what amends i would, therefore accept such kindness as i can.
dorset your son, that with a fearful soul leads discontented steps in foreign soil, this fair alliance quickly shall call home the king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
familiarly shall call thy dorset brother again shall you be mother to a king, and all the ruins of distressful times repair'd with double riches of content.
what!
the liquid drops of tears that you have shed shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl, advantaging their loan with interest of ten times double gain of happiness.
go, then my mother, to thy daughter go make bold her bashful years with your experience prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale put in her tender heart the aspiring flame of golden sovereignty acquaint the princess with the sweet silent hours of marriage joys and when this arm of mine hath chastised the petty rebel, dullbrain'd buckingham, bound with triumphant garlands will i come and lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed to whom i will retail my conquest won, and she shall be sole victress, caesar's caesar.
what were i best to say?
her father's brother would be her lord?
or shall i say, her uncle?
or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
under what title shall i woo for thee, that god, the law, my honour and her love, can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
infer fair england's peace by this alliance.
which she shall purchase with still lasting war.
say that the king, which may command, entreats.
that at her hands which the king's king forbids.
say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.
to wail the tide, as her mother doth.
say, i will love her everlastingly.
but how long shall that title 'ever' last?
sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.
but how long fairly shall her sweet lie last?
so long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
so long as hell and richard likes of it.
say, i, her sovereign, am her subject love.
but she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
be eloquent in my behalf to her.
an honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.
plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
o no, my reasons are too deep and dead too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.
harp not on that string, madam that is past.
harp on it still shall i till heartstrings break.
now, by my george, my garter, and my crown, profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.
i swear by nothing the george, profaned, hath lost his holy honour the garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue the crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.
if something thou wilt swear to be believed, swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
now, by the world 'tis full of thy foul wrongs.
my father's death thy life hath that dishonour'd.
then, by myself thyself thyself misusest.
why then, by god god's wrong is most of all.
if thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by him, the unity the king thy brother made had not been broken, if thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by him, the imperial metal, circling now thy brow, had graced the tender temples of my child, and both the princes had been breathing here, which now, two tender playfellows to dust, thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
what canst thou swear by now?
the time to come.
that thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast for i myself have many tears to wash hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
the children live, whose parents thou hast slaughter'd, ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age the parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd, old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.
swear not by time to come for that thou hast misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.
as i intend to prosper and repent, so thrive i in my dangerous attempt of hostile arms!
myself myself confound!
heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
day, yield me not thy light nor, night, thy rest!
be opposite all planets of good luck to my proceedings, if, with pure heart's love, immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, i tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
in her consists my happiness and thine without her, follows to this land and me, to thee, herself, and many a christian soul, death, desolation, it cannot be avoided but by this it will not be avoided but by this.
therefore, good mother,i must can you so plead what i will be, not what i have been not my deserts, urge the necessity and state of times, and be not peevishfond in great designs.
shall i be tempted of the devil thus?
ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.
shall i forget myself to be myself?
ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.
but thou didst kill my children.
but in your daughter' where in that nest of spicery they shall breed selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
shall i go win my daughter to thy will?
and be a happy mother by the deed.
i go.
write to me very shortly.
and you shall understand from me her mind.
bear her my true love's kiss and so, farewell.
relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
how now!
what news?
my gracious sovereign, on the western coast rideth a puissant navy to the shore throng many doubtful hollowhearted friends, unarm'd, 'tis thought that richmond is their admiral and there they hull, expecting but the aid of buckingham to welcome them ashore.
some light ratcliff, thyself, or catesby where is he?
here, my lord.
post thou to salisbury when thou comest thither dull, unmindful villain, why stand'st thou still, and go'st not to the duke?
first, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind, what from your grace i shall deliver to him.
o, true, bid him levy straight the greatest strength and power he can make, and meet me presently at salisbury.
i go.
what is't your highness' pleasure i shall do at salisbury?
why, what wouldst thou do there before i go?
your highness told me i should post before.
my mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
how now, what news with you?
none good, my lord, to please you with the hearing nor none so bad, but it may well be told.
hoyday, a riddle!
neither good nor bad!
why dost thou run so many mile about, when thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
once more, what news?
richmond is on the seas.
there let him sink, and be the seas on him!
whiteliver'd runagate, what doth he there?
i know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?
stirr'd up by dorset, buckingham, and ely, he makes for england, there to claim the crown.
is the chair empty?
is the sword unsway'd?
is the king dead?
the empire unpossess'd?
what heir of york is there alive but we?
and who is england's king but great york's heir?
then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?
unless for that, my liege, i cannot guess.
unless for that he comes to be your liege, you cannot guess wherefore the welshman comes.
thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, i fear.
no, mighty liege therefore mistrust me not.
where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
where are thy tenants and thy followers?
are they not now upon the western shore.
safeconducting the rebels from their ships!
no, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
what do they in the north, when they should serve their sovereign in the west?
they have not been commanded, please it your majesty to give me leave, i'll muster up my friends, and meet your grace where and what time your majesty shall please.
ay, ay.
i will not trust you, sir.
most mighty sovereign, i never was nor never will be false.
well, go muster men but, hear you, leave behind your son, look your faith be firm.
or else his head's assurance is but frail.
so deal with him as i prove true to you.
my gracious sovereign, now in devonshire, as i by friends am well advertised, sir edward courtney, and the haughty prelate bishop of exeter, his brother there, with many more confederates, are in arms.
my liege, in kent the guildfords are in arms and every hour more competitors flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.
my lord, the army of the duke of buckingham out on you, owls!
nothing but songs of death?
take that, until thou bring me better news.
the news i have to tell your majesty is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters, buckingham's army is dispersed and scatter'd and he himself wander'd away alone, no man knows whither.
there is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
hath any welladvised friend proclaim'd reward to him that brings the traitor in?
such proclamation hath been made, my liege.
sir thomas lovel and lord marquis dorset, 'tis said, my liege, in yorkshire are in arms.
yet this good comfort bring i to your grace, richmond, in yorkshire, sent out a boat unto the shore, to ask those on the banks if they were his assistants, yea or no who answer'd him, they came from buckingham.
he, mistrusting them, hoisted sail and made away for brittany.
march on, march on, since we are up in arms if not to fight with foreign enemies, yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
my liege, the duke of buckingham is taken that the earl of richmond is with a mighty power landed at milford, is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
away towards salisbury!
while we reason here, a royal battle might be won and lost some one take order buckingham be brought to salisbury the rest march on with me.
sir christopher, that in the sty of this most bloody boar my son george stanley is frank' if i revolt, off goes young george's head the fear of that withholds my present aid.
but, tell me, where is princely richmond now?
at pembroke, or at harfordwest, in wales.
what men of name resort to him?
sir walter herbert, a renowned soldier sir gilbert talbot, sir william stanley oxford, redoubted pembroke, sir james blunt, and rice ap thomas with a valiant crew and towards london they do bend their course, if by the way they be not fought withal.
return unto thy lord tell him the queen hath heartily consented he shall espouse elizabeth her daughter.
these letters will resolve him of my mind.
farewell.
will not king richard let me speak with him?
no, my good lord therefore be patient.
hastings, and edward's children, rivers, grey, holy king henry, and thy fair son edward, vaughan, and all that have miscarried by underhand corrupted foul injustice, if that your moody discontented souls do through the clouds behold this present hour, even for revenge mock my destruction!
this is allsouls' day, fellows, is it not?
it is, my lord.
why, then allsouls' day is my body's doomsday.
this is the day that, in king edward's time, i wish't might fall on me, when i was found false to his children or his wife's allies this is the day wherein i wish'd to fall by the false faith of him i trusted most this, this allsouls' day to my fearful soul that high allseer that i dallied with hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head and given in earnest what i begg'd in jest.
thus doth he force the swords of wicked men to turn their own points on their masters' now margaret's curse is fallen upon my head 'when he,' quoth she, 'shall split thy heart with sorrow, remember margaret was a prophetess.
' come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, thus far into the bowels of the land have we march'd on without impediment and here receive we from our father stanley lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
the wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, that spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines, swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough in your embowell'd bosoms, this foul swine lies now even in the centre of this isle, near to the town of leicester, as we learn from tamworth thither is but one day's march.
in god's name, cheerly on, courageous friends, to reap the harvest of perpetual peace by this one bloody trial of sharp war.
every man's conscience is a thousand swords, to fight against that bloody homicide.
i doubt not but his friends will fly to us.
he hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
which in his greatest need will shrink from him.
all for our vantage.
then, in god's name, true hope is swift, and flies with swallow' kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
here pitch our tents, even here in bosworth field.
my lord of surrey, why look you so sad?
my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
my lord of norfolk, here, most gracious liege.
norfolk, we must have knocks ha!
must we not?
we must both give and take, my gracious lord.
up with my tent there!
here will i lie tonight but where tomorrow?
well, all's one for that.
who hath descried the number of the foe?
six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
why, besides, the king's name is a tower of strength, which they upon the adverse party want.
up with my tent there!
valiant gentlemen, let us survey the vantage of the field call for some men of sound direction let's want no discipline, make no delay, for, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
the weary sun hath made a golden set, and by the bright track of his fiery car, gives signal, of a goodly day tomorrow.
sir william brandon, you shall bear my standard.
give me some ink and paper in my tent i'll draw the form and model of our battle, limit each leader to his several charge, and part in just proportion our small strength.
my lord of oxford, you, sir william brandon, and you, sir walter herbert, stay with me.
good captain blunt, bear my good night to him and by the second hour in the morning yet one thing more, good blunt, before thou go'st, where is lord stanley quarter'd, dost thou know?
unless i have mista'en his colours much, which well i am assured i have not done, his regiment lies half a mile at least south from the mighty power of the king.
if without peril it be possible, good captain blunt, bear my goodnight to him, and give him from me this most needful scroll.
upon my life, my lord, i'll undertake it and so, god give you quiet rest tonight!
good night, good captain blunt.
come gentlemen, let us consult upon tomorrow's business in to our tent the air is raw and cold.
what is't o'clock?
it's suppertime, my lord it's nine o'clock.
i will not sup tonight.
give me some ink and paper.
what, is my beaver easier than it was?
and all my armour laid into my tent?
if is, my liege and all things are in readiness.
good norfolk, hie thee to thy charge use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.
i go, my lord.
stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle norfolk.
i warrant you, my lord.
catesby!
my lord?
send out a pursuivant at arms to stanley's regiment bid him bring his power before sunrising, lest his son george fall into the blind cave of eternal night.
fill me a bowl of wine.
give me a watch.
saddle white surrey for the field tomorrow.
look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
ratcliff!
my lord?
saw'st thou the melancholy lord northumberland?
thomas the earl of surrey, and himself, much about cockshut time, from troop to troop went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
so, i am satisfied.
i have not that alacrity of spirit, nor cheer of mind, that i was wont to have.
set it down.
is ink and paper ready?
it is, my lord.
bid my guard watch leave me.
ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent and help to arm me.
leave me, i say.
fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
all comfort that the dark night can afford be to thy person, noble fatherinlaw!
tell me, how fares our loving mother?
i, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother who prays continually for richmond' so much for that.
the silent hours steal on, and flaky darkness breaks within the east.
in brief,for so the season bids us be, prepare thy battle early in the morning, and put thy fortune to the arbitrement of bloody strokes and mortalstaring war.
i, as i maythat which i would i cannot, with best advantage will deceive the time, but on thy side i may not be too forward lest, being seen, thy brother, tender george, be executed in his father's sight.
the leisure and the fearful time cuts off the ceremonious vows of love and ample interchange of sweet discourse, which so long sunder' god give us leisure for these rites of love!
once more, be valiant, and speed well!
good lords, i'll strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap, lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow, once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
o thou, whose captain i account myself, look on my forces with a gracious eye put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, that they may crush down with a heavy fall the usurping helmets of our adversaries!
make us thy ministers of chastisement, that we may praise thee in the victory!
to thee i do commend my watchful soul, sleeping and waking, o, defend me still!
bind up my wounds.
have mercy, jesu!
soft!
i did but dream.
o coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
the lights burn blue.
it is now dead midnight.
cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
what do i fear?
myself?
there' richard loves richard that is, i am i.
is there a murderer here?
yes, then fly.
what, from myself?
lest i revenge.
what, myself upon myself?
alack.
i love myself.
wherefore?
for any good that i myself have done unto myself?
o, no!
alas, i rather hate myself for hateful deeds committed by myself!
yet i lie.
i am not.
fool, fool, do not flatter.
my conscience hath a thousand several tongues, and every tongue brings in a several tale, and every tale condemns me for a villain.
perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree murder, stem murder, in the direst degree all several sins, all used in each degree, throng to the bar, crying all, guilty!
guilty!
i shall despair.
there is no creature loves me and if i die, nay, wherefore should they, since that i myself find in myself no pity to myself?
methought the souls of all that i had murder'd came to my tent and every one did threat tomorrow's vengeance on the head of richard.
my lord!
'zounds!
who is there?
ratcliff, my lord 'tis i.
the early villagecock hath twice done salutation to the morn your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.
o ratcliff, i have dream'd a fearful dream!
what thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true?
no doubt, my lord.
o ratcliff, i fear, i fear, nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
by the apostle paul, shadows tonight have struck more terror to the soul of richard than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers armed in proof, and led by shallow richmond.
it is not yet near day.
come, go with me under our tents i'll play the eavesdropper, to see if any mean to shrink from me.
good morrow, richmond!
cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
how have you slept, my lord?
the sweetest sleep, and fairestboding dreams that ever enter'd in a drowsy head, have i since your departure had, my lords.
methought their souls, whose bodies richard murder'd, came to my tent, i promise you, my soul is very jocund in the remembrance of so fair a dream.
how far into the morning is it, lords?
upon the stroke of four.
why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
more than i have said, loving countrymen, the leisure and enforcement of the time yet remember this, god and our good cause fight upon our side the prayers of holy saints and wronged souls, like highrear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces richard except, those whom we fight against for what is he they follow?
truly, gentlemen, a bloody tyrant and a homicide one raised in blood, and one in blood establish'd one that made means to come by what he hath, and slaughter'd those that were the means to help him abase foul stone, made precious by the foil of england's chair, where he is falsely set one that hath ever been god' then, if you fight against god's enemy, god will in justice ward you as his soldiers if you do sweat to put a tyrant down, you sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain if you do fight against your country's foes, your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire if you do fight in safeguard of your wives, your wives shall welcome home the conquerors if you do free your children from the sword, your children's children quit it in your age.
then, in the name of god and all these rights, advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
for me, the ransom of my bold attempt shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face but if i thrive, the gain of my attempt the least of you shall share his part thereof.
sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully god and saint george!
richmond and victory!
what said northumberland as touching richmond?
that he was never trained up in arms.
and what said surrey then?
he smiled and said 'the better for our purpose.
' he was in the right and so indeed it is.
ten the clock there.
give me a calendar.
who saw the sun today?
not i, my lord.
then he disdains to shine for by the book he should have braved the east an hour ago a black day will it be to somebody.
ratcliff!
my lord?
the sun will not be seen today the sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
i would these dewy tears were from the ground.
not shine today!
why, what is that to me more than to richmond?
for the selfsame heaven that frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
arm, arm, my lord the foe vaunts in the field.
come, bustle, bustle caparison my horse.
call up lord stanley, i will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, my foreward shall be drawn out all in length, consisting equally of horse and foot our archers shall be placed in the midst john duke of norfolk, thomas earl of surrey, shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
they thus directed, we will follow in the main battle, whose puissance on either side shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
this, and saint george to boot!
what think'st thou, norfolk?
a good direction, warlike sovereign.
this found i on my tent this morning.
my lord, he doth deny to come.
off with his son george's head!
my lord, the enemy is past the marsh after the battle let george stanley die.
advance our standards, set upon our foes our ancient word of courage, fair saint george, inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
upon them!
victory sits on our helms.
rescue, my lord of norfolk, rescue, rescue!
the king enacts more wonders than a man, his horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, seeking for richmond in the throat of death.
rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
a horse!
a horse!
my kingdom for a horse!
withdraw, my lord i'll help you to a horse.
slave, i have set my life upon a cast, i think there be six richmonds in the field five have i slain today instead of him.
a horse!
a horse!
my kingdom for a horse!
god and your arms be praised, victorious friends, the day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.
courageous richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
lo, here, this longusurped royalty from the dead temples of this bloody wretch have i pluck'd off, wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
great god of heaven, say amen to all!
but, tell me, is young george stanley living?
he is, my lord, and safe in leicester town whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
what men of name are slain on either side?
john duke of norfolk, walter lord ferrers, sir robert brakenbury, and sir william brandon.
proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled and then, as we have ta'en the sacrament, smile heaven upon this fair conjunction, that long have frown'd upon their enmity!
what traitor hears me, and says not amen?
england hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself the brother blindly shed the brother's blood, the father rashly slaughter'd his own son, the son, compell'd, all this divided york and lancaster, divided in their dire division, o, now, let richmond and elizabeth, the true succeeders of each royal house, by god's fair ordinance conjoin together!
and let their heirs, god, if thy will be so.
enrich the time to come with smoothfaced peace, with smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!
abate the edge of traitors, gracious lord, that would reduce these bloody days again, and make poor england weep in streams of blood!
let them not live to taste this land's increase that would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
now civil wounds are stopp'd, that she may long live here, god say amen!
old john of gaunt, timehonour'd lancaster, hast thou, according to thy oath and band, brought hither henry hereford thy bold son, here to make good the boisterous late appeal, which then our leisure would not let us hear, against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray?
i have, my liege.
tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him, if he appeal the duke on ancient malice or worthily, as a good subject should, on some known ground of treachery in him?
as near as i could sift him on that argument, on some apparent danger seen in him aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.
then call them to our presence face to face, and frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear highstomach'd are they both, and full of ire, in rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
many years of happy days befal my gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
each day still better other's happiness until the heavens, envying earth's good hap, add an immortal title to your crown!
yet one but flatters us, as well appeareth by the cause you come namely to appeal each other of high treason.
cousin of hereford, what dost thou object against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray?
first, heaven be the record to my speech!
in the devotion of a subject's love, tendering the precious safety of my prince, and free from other misbegotten hate, come i appellant to this princely presence.
now, thomas mowbray, do i turn to thee, and mark my greeting well for what i speak my body shall make good upon this earth, or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
thou art a traitor and a miscreant, too good to be so and too bad to live, since the more fair and crystal is the sky, the uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
once more, the more to aggravate the note, with a foul traitor's name stuff i thy throat and wish, so please my sovereign, ere i move, what my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
'tis not the trial of a woman's war, the bitter clamour of two eager tongues, can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain the blood is hot that must be cool' yet can i not of such tame patience boast as to be hush' first, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me from giving reins and spurs to my free speech which else would post until it had return'd these terms of treason doubled down his throat.
setting aside his high blood's royalty, and let him be no kinsman to my liege, i do defy him, and i spit at him which to maintain i would allow him odds, and meet him, were i tied to run afoot even to the frozen ridges of the alps, or any other ground inhabitable, where ever englishman durst set his foot.
mean time let this defend my loyalty, by all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
pale trembling coward, there i throw my gage, disclaiming here the kindred of the king, and lay aside my high blood's royalty, which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
if guilty dread have left thee so much strength as to take up mine honour's pawn, by that and all the rites of knighthood else, will i make good against thee, arm to arm, what i have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
i take it up and by that sword i swear which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder, i'll answer thee in any fair degree, and when i mount, alive may i not light, if i be traitor or unjustly fight!
what doth our cousin lay to mowbray's charge?
it must be great that can inherit us so much as of a thought of ill in him.
look, what i speak, my life shall prove it true that mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles in name of lendings for your highness' soldiers, the which he hath detain'd for lewd employments, like a false traitor and injurious villain.
besides i say and will in battle prove, or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge that ever was survey'd by english eye, that all the treasons for these eighteen years complotted and contrived in this land fetch from false mowbray their first head and spring.
further i say and further will maintain upon his bad life to make all this good, that he did plot the duke of gloucester's death, suggest his soonbelieving adversaries, and consequently, like a traitor coward, which blood, like sacrificing abel's, cries, even from the tongueless caverns of the earth, to me for justice and rough chastisement and, by the glorious worth of my descent, this arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
how high a pitch his resolution soars!
thomas of norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
o, let my sovereign turn away his face and bid his ears a little while be deaf, till i have told this slander of his blood, how god and good men hate so foul a liar.
mowbray, were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir, as he is but my father's brother's son, now, by my sceptre's awe, i make a vow, such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood should nothing privilege him, nor partialize he is our subject, mowbray free speech and fearless i to thee allow.
then, bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
three parts of that receipt i had for calais disbursed i duly to his highness' soldiers the other part reserved i by consent, for that my sovereign liege was in my debt upon remainder of a dear account, now swallow down that lie.
for gloucester's death, i slew him not but to my own disgrace neglected my sworn duty in that case.
for you, my noble lord of lancaster, the honourable father to my foe once did i lay an ambush for your life, a trespass that doth vex my grieved soul but ere i last received the sacrament i did confess it, and exactly begg'd your grace's pardon, and i hope i had it.
as for the rest appeall'd, it issues from the rancour of a villain, a recreant and most degenerate traitor which in myself i boldly will defend and interchangeably hurl down my gage upon this overweening traitor's foot, to prove myself a loyal gentleman even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
in haste whereof, most heartily i pray your highness to assign our trial day.
wrathkindled gentlemen, be ruled by me let' this we prescribe, though no physician deep malice makes too deep incision forget, forgive conclude and be agreed our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
good uncle, let this end where it begun we'll calm the duke of norfolk, you your son.
to be a make throw down, my son, the duke of norfolk's gage.
and, norfolk, throw down his.
when, harry, when?
obedience bids i should not bid again.
norfolk, throw down, we bid there is no boot.
myself i throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
my life thou shalt command, the one my duty owes but my fair name, despite of death that lives upon my grave, to dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
i am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here, pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear, the which no balm can cure but his heartblood which breathed this poison.
lions make leopards tame.
yea, take but my shame.
and i resign my gage.
my dear dear lord, the purest treasure mortal times afford that away, men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
a jewel in a tentimesbarr'dup chest is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
mine honour is my life take honour from me, then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try in that i live and for that will i die.
cousin, throw up your gage do you begin.
o, god defend my soul from such deep sin!
shall i seem crestfall'n in my father's sight?
or with pale beggarfear impeach my height before this outdared dastard?
ere my tongue shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong, or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear the slavish motive of recanting fear, and spit it bleeding in his high disgrace, where shame doth harbour, even in mowbray's face.
we were not born to sue, but to command which since we cannot do to make you friends, be ready, as your lives shall answer it, at coventry, upon saint lambert' there shall your swords and lances arbitrate since we can not atone you, we shall see justice design the victor's chivalry.
lord marshal, command our officers at arms be ready to direct these home alarms.
alas, the part i had in woodstock's blood doth more solicit me than your exclaims, to stir against the butchers of his life!
but since correction lieth in those hands which made the fault that we cannot correct, put we our quarrel to the will of heaven who, when they see the hours ripe on earth, will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one, were as seven vials of his sacred blood, some of those seven are dried by nature's course, some of those branches by the destinies cut but thomas, my dear lord, my life, my gloucester, one vial full of edward's sacred blood, one flourishing branch of his most royal root, is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt, is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded, by envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
ah, gaunt, his blood was thine!
that bed, that womb, that metal, that selfmould, that fashion'd thee made him a man and though thou livest and breathest, thou dost consent in some large measure to thy father's death, in that thou seest thy wretched brother die, who was the model of thy father's life.
call it not patience, gaunt in suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd, thou showest the naked pathway to thy life, that which in mean men we intitle patience is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
what shall i say?
to safeguard thine own life, the best way is to venge my gloucester's death.
god's is the quarrel for god's substitute, his deputy anointed in his sight, the which if wrongfully, let heaven revenge for i may never lift an angry arm against his minister.
where then, alas, may i complain myself?
to god, the widow's champion and defence.
why, then, i will.
farewell, old gaunt.
thou goest to coventry, there to behold o, sit my husband's wrongs on hereford's spear, that it may enter butcher mowbray's breast!
or, if misfortune miss the first career, be mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom, they may break his foaming courser's back, and throw the rider headlong in the lists, a caitiff recreant to my cousin hereford!
farewell, thy sometimes brother's wife with her companion grief must end her life.
sister, farewell as much good stay with thee as go with me!
grief boundeth where it falls, not with the empty hollowness, i take my leave before i have begun, for sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
commend me to thy brother, edmund york.
lo,nay, yet depart not so though this be all, do not so quickly go i shall remember more.
bid himah, what?
with all good speed at plashy visit me.
alack, and what shall good old york there see but empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls, unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
and what hear there for welcome but my groans?
therefore commend me let him not come there, to seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
desolate, desolate, the last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
my lord aumerle, is harry hereford arm'd?
yea, at all points and longs to enter in.
the duke of norfolk, sprightfully and bold, stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay for nothing but his majesty's approach.
marshal, demand of yonder champion ask him his name and orderly proceed to swear him in the justice of his cause.
in god's name and the king's, say who thou art and why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms, against what man thou comest, speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath as so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
my name is thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk who hither come engaged by my oath which god defend a knight should violate!
both to defend my loyalty and truth to god, my king and my succeeding issue, against the duke of hereford that appeals me and, by the grace of god and this mine arm, to prove him, in defending of myself, a traitor to my god, my king, and as i truly fight, defend me heaven!
marshal, ask yonder knight in arms, both who he is and why he cometh hither thus plated in habiliments of war, and formally, according to our law, depose him in the justice of his cause.
what is thy name?
and wherefore comest thou hither, before king richard in his royal lists?
against whom comest thou?
and what's thy quarrel?
speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
harry of hereford, lancaster and derby am i who ready here do stand in arms, to prove, by god's grace and my body's valour, in lists, on thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk, that he is a traitor, foul and dangerous, to god of heaven, king richard and to me and as i truly fight, defend me heaven!
on pain of death, no person be so bold or daringhardy as to touch the lists, except the marshal and such officers appointed to direct these fair designs.
lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand, for mowbray and myself are like two men that vow a long and weary pilgrimage then let us take a ceremonious leave and loving farewell of our several friends.
the appellant in all duty greets your highness, and craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
we will descend and fold him in our arms.
cousin of hereford, as thy cause is right, so be thy fortune in this royal fight!
farewell, my blood which if today thou shed, lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
o let no noble eye profane a tear for me, if i be gored with mowbray' as confident as is the falcon's flight against a bird, do i with mowbray fight.
my loving lord, i take my leave of you of you, my noble cousin, lord aumerle not sick, although i have to do with death, but lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
lo, as at english feasts, so i regreet the daintiest last, o thou, the earthly author of my blood, whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate, doth with a twofold vigour lift me up to reach at victory above my head, add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers and with thy blessings steel my lance's point, that it may enter mowbray's waxen coat, and furbish new the name of john a gaunt, even in the lusty havior of his son.
god in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
be swift like lightning in the execution and let thy blows, doubly redoubled, fall like amazing thunder on the casque rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
mine innocency and saint george to thrive!
however god or fortune cast my lot, there lives or dies, true to king richard's throne, a loyal, never did captive with a freer heart cast off his chains of bondage and embrace his golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement, more than my dancing soul doth celebrate this feast of battle with mine adversary.
most mighty liege, and my companion peers, as gentle and as jocund as to jest truth hath a quiet breast.
farewell, securely i espy virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
order the trial, marshal, and begin.
harry of hereford, lancaster and derby, receive thy lance and god defend the right!
strong as a tower in hope, i cry amen.
go bear this lance to thomas, duke of norfolk.
harry of hereford, lancaster and derby, stands here for god, his sovereign and himself, on pain to be found false and recreant, to prove the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray, a traitor to his god, his king and him and dares him to set forward to the fight.
here standeth thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk, on pain to be found false and recreant, both to defend himself and to approve henry of hereford, lancaster, and derby, to god, his sovereign and to him disloyal courageously and with a free desire attending but the signal to begin.
sound, trumpets and set forward, combatants.
stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
let them lay by their helmets and their spears, and let the trumpets sound while we return these dukes what we decree.
draw near, and list what with our council we have done.
for that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd with that dear blood which it hath fostered and for our eyes do hate the dire aspect of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword and for we think the eaglewinged pride of skyaspiring and ambitious thoughts, with rivalhating envy, set on you to wake our peace, which in our country's cradle draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums, with harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray, and grating shock of wrathful iron arms, might from our quiet confines fright fair peace and make us wade even in our kindred's blood, therefore, you, cousin hereford, upon pain of life, till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields shall not regreet our fair dominions, but tread the stranger paths of banishment.
this must my comfort be, sun that warms you here shall shine on me and those his golden beams to you here lent shall point on me and gild my banishment.
norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, the sly slow hours shall not determinate the dateless limit of thy dear exile the hopeless word of 'never to return' breathe i against thee, upon pain of life.
a heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, and all unlook'd for from your highness' a dearer merit, not so deep a maim as to be cast forth in the common air, have i deserved at your highness' hands.
the language i have learn'd these forty years, my native english, and now my tongue's use is to me no more than an unstringed viol or a harp, or like a cunning instrument cased up, or, being open, put into his hands within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue, doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips and dull unfeeling barren ignorance is made my gaoler to attend on me.
i am too old to fawn upon a nurse, what is thy sentence then but speechless death, which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
after our sentence plaining comes too late.
then thus i turn me from my country's light, to dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
return again, and take an oath with thee.
lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands swear by the duty that you owe to god our part therein we banish with yourselves you never shall, so help you truth and god!
embrace each other's love in banishment nor never look upon each other's face nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile this louring tempest of your homebred hate nor never by advised purpose meet to plot, contrive, or complot any ill 'gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
i swear.
and i, to keep all this.
norfolk, by this time, had the king permitted us, one of our souls had wander'd in the air.
banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh, as now our flesh is banish' confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm since thou hast far to go, bear not along the clogging burthen of a guilty soul.
no, if ever i were traitor, my name be blotted from the book of life, and i from heaven banish'd as from hence!
but what thou art, god, thou, and i do know and all too soon, i fear, the king shall rue.
farewell, my liege.
now no way can i stray save back to england, all the world's my way.
uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes thy sad aspect hath from the number of his banish'd years pluck'd four away.
six frozen winter spent, return with welcome home from banishment.
how long a time lies in one little word!
four lagging winters and four wanton springs such is the breath of kings.
i thank my liege, that in regard of me he shortens four years of my son' but little vantage shall i reap thereby for, ere the six years that he hath to spend can change their moons and bring their times about my oildried lamp and timebewasted light shall be extinct with age and endless night my inch of taper will be burnt and done, and blindfold death not let me see my son.
why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
but not a minute, king, shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow, and pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow thou canst help time to furrow me with age, but stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage thy word is current with him for my death, but dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
thy son is banish'd upon good advice, whereto thy tongue a party why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
you urged me as a judge but i had rather you would have bid me argue like a father.
o, had it been a stranger, not my child, a partial slander sought i to avoid, and in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
alas, i look'd when some of you should say, i was too strict to make mine own away but you gave leave to my unwilling tongue against my will to do myself this wrong.
cousin, farewell and, uncle, six years we banish him, and he shall go.
cousin, what presence must not know, from where you do remain let paper show.
my lord, no leave take i for i will ride, as far as land will let me, by your side.
o, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words, that thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
i have too few to take my leave of you, when the tongue's office should be prodigal to breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
joy absent, grief is present for that time.
what is six winters?
they are quickly gone.
to men in joy but grief makes one hour ten.
call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
my heart will sigh when i miscall it so, which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.
the sullen passage of thy weary steps esteem as foil wherein thou art to set the precious jewel of thy home return.
nay, rather, every tedious stride i make will but remember me what a deal of world i wander from the jewels that i love.
must i not serve a long apprenticehood to foreign passages, and in the end, having my freedom, boast of nothing else but that i was a journeyman to grief?
all places that the eye of heaven visits are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
teach thy necessity to reason thus there is no virtue like necessity.
think not the king did banish thee, but thou the king.
woe doth the heavier sit, where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
go, say i sent thee forth to purchase honour and not the king exiled thee or suppose devouring pestilence hangs in our air look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it to lie that way thou go'st, suppose the singing birds musicians, the grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd, the flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more than a delightful measure or a dance for gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite the man that mocks at it and sets it light.
o, who can hold a fire in his hand by thinking on the frosty caucasus?
or cloy the hungry edge of appetite by bare imagination of a feast?
or wallow naked in december snow by thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
o, no!
the apprehension of the good fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.
come, come, my son, i' had i thy youth and cause, i would not stay.
then, england's ground, farewell sweet soil, adieu my mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
where'er i wander, boast of this i can, though banish'd, yet a trueborn englishman.
we did observe.
cousin aumerle, how far brought you high hereford on his way?
i brought high hereford, if you call him so, but to the next highway, and there i left him.
and say, what store of parting tears were shed?
faith, none for me except the northeast wind, which then blew bitterly against our faces, awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
what said our cousin when you parted with him?
'' and, for my heart disdained that my tongue should so profane the word, that taught me craft to counterfeit oppression of such grief that words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours and added years to his short banishment, he should have had a volume of farewells but since it would not, he had none of me.
he is our cousin, cousin but 'tis doubt, when time shall call him home from banishment, whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
ourself and bushy, bagot here and green observed his courtship to the common people how he did seem to dive into their hearts with humble and familiar courtesy, what reverence he did throw away on slaves, wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles and patient underbearing of his fortune, as 'twere to banish their affects with him.
off goes his bonnet to an oysterwench a brace of draymen bid god speed him well and had the tribute of his supple knee, with 'thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends' as were our england in reversion his, and he our subjects' next degree in hope.
well, he is gone and with him go these thoughts.
now for the rebels which stand out in ireland, expedient manage must be made, my liege, ere further leisure yield them further means for their advantage and your highness' loss.
and, for our coffers, with too great a court and liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, we are inforced to farm our royal realm the revenue whereof shall furnish us if that come short, our substitutes at home shall have blank charters whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, they shall subscribe them for large sums of gold and send them after to supply our wants for we will make for ireland presently.
bushy, what news?
old john of gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, suddenly taken and hath sent post haste to entreat your majesty to visit him.
where lies he?
at ely house.
now put it, god, in the physician's mind to help him to his grave immediately!
the lining of his coffers shall make coats to deck our soldiers for these irish wars.
come, gentlemen, let' pray god we may make haste, and come too late!
amen.
will the king come, that i may breathe my last in wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath for all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
o, but they say the tongues of dying men where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, for they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
he that no more must say is listen'd more than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose more are men's ends mark' the setting sun, and music at the close, as the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last, though richard my life's counsel would not hear, my death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
no it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds, as praises, of whose taste the wise are fond, lascivious metres, to whose venom sound the open ear of youth doth always listen report of fashions in proud italy, whose manners still our tardy apish nation limps after in base imitation.
where doth the world thrust forth a vanity so it be new, there's no respect how vile that is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
then all too late comes counsel to be heard, where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
'tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
methinks i am a prophet new inspired his rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last, for violent fires soon burn out themselves small showers last long, but sudden storms are short he tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes light vanity, insatiate cormorant, consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
this royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle, this earth of majesty, this seat of mars, this other eden, demiparadise, this fortress built by nature for herself against infection and the hand of war, this happy breed of men, this little world, this precious stone set in the silver sea, which serves it in the office of a wall, or as a moat defensive to a house, against the envy of less happier lands, this blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this england, this nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth, renowned for their deeds as far from home, for christian service and true chivalry, as is the sepulchre in stubborn jewry, of the world's ransom, blessed mary's son, this land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, dear for her reputation through the world, is now leased out, i die pronouncing it, england, bound in with the triumphant sea whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege of watery neptune, is now bound in with shame, that england, that was wont to conquer others, hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, how happy then were my ensuing death!
deal mildly with his youth for young hot colts being raged do rage the more.
how fares our noble uncle, lancaster?
what comfort, man?
how is't with aged gaunt?
o how that name befits my composition!
old gaunt indeed, within me grief hath kept a tedious fast and who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
for sleeping england long time have i watch'd watching breeds leanness, the pleasure that some fathers feed upon, is my strict fast i mean, my children's looks and therein fasting, gaunt am i for the grave, gaunt as a grave, whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
can sick men play so nicely with their names?
no, since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, i mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
should dying men flatter with those that live?
no, no, men living flatter those that die.
thou, now adying, say'st thou flatterest me.
o, no!
thou diest, though i the sicker be.
i am in health, i breathe, and see thee ill.
now he that made me knows i see thee ill ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
thy deathbed is no lesser than thy land wherein thou liest in reputation sick and thou, too careless patient as thou art, commit'st thy anointed body to the cure a thousand flatterers sit within thy crown, whose compass is no bigger than thy head and yet, incaged in so small a verge, the waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
o, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye seen how his son's son should destroy his sons, from forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, deposing thee before thou wert possess'd, which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, it were a shame to let this land by lease but for thy world enjoying but this land, is it not more than shame to shame it so?
landlord of england art thou now, thy state of law is bondslave to the law and thou a lunatic leanwitted fool, presuming on an ague's privilege, darest with thy frozen admonition make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood with fury from his native residence.
now, by my seat's right royal majesty, wert thou not brother to great edward's son, this tongue that runs so roundly in thy head should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
o, spare me not, my brother edward's son, for that i was his father edward's son that blood already, like the pelican, hast thou tapp' my brother gloucester, plain wellmeaning soul, whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
may be a precedent and witness good that thou respect'st not spilling edward' join with the present sickness that i have and thy unkindness be like crooked age, to crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
these words hereafter thy tormentors be!
convey me to my bed, love they to live that love and honour have.
and let them die that age and sullens have for both hast thou, and both become the grave.
i do beseech your majesty, impute his words he loves you, on my life, and holds you dear as harry duke of hereford, were he here.
right, as hereford's love, so his as theirs, so mine and all be as it is.
my liege, old gaunt commends him to your majesty.
what says he?
nay, nothing all is said his tongue is now a stringless instrument words, life and all, old lancaster hath spent.
be york the next that must be bankrupt so!
though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
the ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he his time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
so much for that.
we must supplant those rough rugheaded kerns, which live like venom where no venom else but only they have privilege to live.
and for these great affairs do ask some charge, towards our assistance we do seize to us the plate, corn, revenues and moveables, whereof our uncle gaunt did stand possess'd.
how long shall i be patient?
ah, how long shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
not gloucester's death, nor hereford's banishment not gaunt's rebukes, nor england's private wrongs, nor the prevention of poor bolingbroke about his marriage, nor my own disgrace, have ever made me sour my patient cheek, or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
i am the last of noble edward's sons, of whom thy father, prince of wales, in war was never lion raged more fierce, in peace was never gentle lamb more mild, than was that young and princely gentleman.
his face thou hast, for even so look'd he, accomplish'd with the number of thy hours but when he frown'd, it was against the french and not against his friends his noble hand did will what he did spend and spent not that which his triumphant father's hand had won his hands were guilty of no kindred blood, but bloody with the enemies of his kin.
o richard!
york is too far gone with grief, or else he never would compare between.
why, uncle, what's the matter?
o my liege, pardon me, if you please if not, i, pleased not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
seek you to seize and gripe into your hands the royalties and rights of banish'd hereford?
is not gaunt dead, and doth not hereford live?
was not gaunt just, and is not harry true?
did not the one deserve to have an heir?
is not his heir a welldeserving son?
take hereford's rights away, and take from time his charters and his customary rights let not tomorrow then ensue today be not thyself for how art thou a king but by fair sequence and succession?
now, afore godgod forbid i say true!
if you do wrongfully seize hereford's rights, call in the letters patent that he hath by his attorneysgeneral to sue his livery, and deny his offer'd homage, you pluck a thousand dangers on your head, you lose a thousand welldisposed hearts and prick my tender patience, to those thoughts which honour and allegiance cannot think.
think what you will, we seize into our hands his plate, his goods, his money and his lands.
i' my liege, what will ensue hereof, there's none can tell but by bad courses may be understood that their events can never fall out good.
go, bushy, bid him repair to us to ely house to see this business.
tomorrow next we will for ireland and 'tis time, and we create, in absence of ourself, our uncle york lord governor of england for he is just and always loved us well.
come on, tomorrow must we part be merry, for our time of stay is short well, lords, the duke of lancaster is dead.
and living too for now his son is duke.
barely in title, not in revenue.
richly in both, if justice had her right.
my heart is great but it must break with silence, ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
nay, speak thy mind and let him ne'er speak more that speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
tends that thou wouldst speak to the duke of hereford?
if it be so, out with it boldly, man quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
no good at all that i can do for him unless you call it good to pity him, bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
now, afore god, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne in him, a royal prince, and many moe of noble blood in this declining land.
the king is not himself, but basely led by flatterers and what they will inform, merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all, that will the king severely prosecute 'gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
the commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes, the nobles hath he fined for ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
and daily new exactions are devised, as blanks, benevolences, but what, o' god's name, doth become of this?
wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not, but basely yielded upon compromise more hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
the earl of wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
the king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
he hath not money for these irish wars, his burthenous taxations notwithstanding, but by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
most degenerate king!
but, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing, yet see no shelter to avoid the storm we see the wind sit sore upon our sails, and yet we strike not, but securely perish.
we see the very wreck that we must suffer and unavoided is the danger now, for suffering so the causes of our wreck.
not so even through the hollow eyes of death i spy life peering but i dare not say how near the tidings of our comfort is.
nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
be confident to speak, we three are but thyself and, speaking so, thy words are but as thoughts therefore, be bold.
i have from port le blanc, a bay in brittany, received intelligence that harry duke of hereford, rainold lord cobham, that late broke from the duke of exeter, his brother, archbishop late of canterbury, sir thomas erpingham, sir john ramston, sir john norbery, sir robert waterton and francis quoint, all these well furnish'd by the duke of bretagne with eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, are making hither with all due expedience perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay the first departing of the king for ireland.
if then we shall shake off our slavish yoke, imp out our drooping country's broken wing, redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown, wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt and make high majesty look like itself, away with me in post to ravenspurgh but if you faint, as fearing to do so, stay and be secret, and myself will go.
to horse, to horse!
urge doubts to them that fear.
hold out my horse, and i will first be there.
madam, you promised, when you parted with the king, to lay aside lifeharming heaviness and entertain a cheerful disposition.
to please the king i did to please myself i cannot do it yet i know no cause why i should welcome such a guest as grief, save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest yet again, methinks, some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb, is coming towards me, and my inward soul at some thing it grieves, more than with parting from my lord the king.
each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, which shows like grief itself, but is not so for sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, divides one thing entire to many objects like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon show nothing but confusion, eyed awry so your sweet majesty, looking awry upon your lord's departure, find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows of what it is not.
then, thricegracious queen, more than your lord' more's not seen or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, which for things true weeps things imaginary.
it may be so but yet my inward soul howe'er it be, i cannot but be sad so heavy sad as, though on thinking on no thought i think, makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
'tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
' conceit is still derived from some forefather grief mine is not so, for nothing had begot my something grief 'tis in reversion that i do possess but what it is, that is not yet known what i cannot name 'tis nameless woe, i wot.
god save your majesty!
and well met, i hope the king is not yet shipp'd for ireland.
why hopest thou so?
'tis better hope he is for his designs crave haste, then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
that he, our hope, might have retired his power, and driven into despair an enemy's hope, the banish'd bolingbroke repeals himself, and with uplifted arms is safe arrived at ravenspurgh.
now god in heaven forbid!
ah, madam, ' and that is worse, the lord northumberland, his son young henry percy, the lords of ross, beaumond, and willoughby, with all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
why have you not proclaim'd northumberland and all the rest revolted faction traitors?
whereupon the earl of worcester hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship, and all the household servants fled with him to bolingbroke.
so, green, thou art the midwife to my woe, and bolingbroke my sorrow' now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy, and i, a gasping newdeliver'd mother, have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
despair not, madam.
who shall hinder me?
i will despair, and be at enmity he is a flatterer, a parasite, a keeper back of death, who gently would dissolve the bands of life, which false hope lingers in extremity.
here comes the duke of york.
o, full of careful business are his looks!
uncle, for god's sake, speak comfortable words.
should i do so, comfort's in heaven and we are on the earth, where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
your husband, he is gone to save far off, here am i left to underprop his land, who, weak with age, now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.
my lord, your son was gone before i came.
he was?
why, so!
go all which way it will!
the nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold, and will, i fear, revolt on hereford's side.
sirrah, get thee to plashy, to my sister gloucester hold, take my ring.
my lord, i had forgot to tell your lordship, today, as i came by, i called there but i shall grieve you to report the rest.
what is't, knave?
an hour before i came, the duchess died.
god for his mercy!
what a tide of woes comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
i would to god, so my untruth had not provoked him to it, the king had cut off my head with my brother's.
what, are there no posts dispatch'd for ireland?
how shall we do for money for these wars?
come, sister,cousin, i would saypray, pardon me.
go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts and bring away the armour that is there.
gentlemen, will you go muster men?
if i know how or which way to order these affairs thus thrust disorderly into my hands, never believe me.
the one is my sovereign, whom both my oath and duty bids defend the other again is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
well, somewhat we must do.
come, cousin, i'll dispose of you.
gentlemen, go, muster up your men, and meet me presently at berkeley.
i should to plashy too all is uneven, and every thing is left at six and seven.
the wind sits fair for news to go to ireland, but none returns.
for us to levy power proportionable to the enemy is all unpossible.
besides, our nearness to the king in love is near the hate of those love not the king.
and that' for their love lies in their purses, and whoso empties them by so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.
if judgement lie in them, then so do we, because we ever have been near the king.
well, the earl of wiltshire is already there.
thither will i with you for little office the hateful commons will perform for us, except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
will you go along with us?
no i will to ireland to his majesty.
if heart's presages be not vain, we three here art that ne'er shall meet again.
that's as york thrives to beat back bolingbroke.
alas, poor duke!
the task he undertakes where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
well, we may meet again.
i fear me, never.
how far is it, my lord, to berkeley now?
believe me, noble lord, these high wild hills and rough uneven ways draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome, and yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, making the hard way sweet and delectable.
but i bethink me what a weary way from ravenspurgh to cotswold will be found in ross and willoughby, wanting your company, which, i protest, hath very much beguiled but theirs is sweetened with the hope to have the present benefit which i possess and hope to joy is little less in joy than hope enjoy' by this the weary lords shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done by sight of what i have, your noble company.
of much less value is my company than your good words.
but who comes here?
it is my son, young harry percy, sent from my brother worcester, whencesoever.
harry, how fares your uncle?
i had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
why, is he not with the queen?
no, my good lord he hath forsook the court, broken his staff of office and dispersed the household of the king.
what was his reason?
he was not so resolved when last we spake together.
because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
but he, my lord, is gone to ravenspurgh, to offer service to the duke of hereford, and sent me over by berkeley, to discover what power the duke of york had levied there then with directions to repair to ravenspurgh.
have you forgot the duke of hereford, boy?
no, my good lord, for that is not forgot which ne' to my knowledge, i never in my life did look on him.
then learn to know him now this is the duke.
my gracious lord, i tender you my service, such as it is, being tender, which elder days shall ripen and confirm to more approved service and desert.
i thank thee, gentle percy and be sure i count myself in nothing else so happy as in a soul remembering my good friends and, as my fortune ripens with thy love, it shall be still thy true love' my heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
how far is it to berkeley?
and what stir keeps good old york there with his men of war?
there stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, mann'd with three hundred men, as i have heard and in it are the lords of york, berkeley, and seymour none else of name and noble estimate.
here come the lords of ross and willoughby, bloody with spurring, fieryred with haste.
welcome, my lords.
i wot your love pursues a banish' all my treasury is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd shall be your love and labour's recompense.
your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
and far surmounts our labour to attain it.
evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor which, till my infant fortune comes to years, stands for my bounty.
but who comes here?
it is my lord of berkeley, as i guess.
my lord of hereford, my message is to you.
my lord, my answer isto lancaster and i am come to seek that name in england and i must find that title in your tongue, before i make reply to aught you say.
mistake me not, my lord 'tis not my meaning to you, my lord, i come, what lord you will, from the most gracious regent of this land, the duke of york, to know what pricks you on to take advantage of the absent time and fright our native peace with selfborn arms.
i shall not need transport my words by you here comes his grace in person.
my noble uncle!
show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee, whose duty is deceiveable and false.
my gracious uncle tut, tut!
grace me no grace, i am no traitor's uncle and that word 'grace.
' in an ungracious mouth is but profane.
why have those banish'd and forbidden legs dared once to touch a dust of england's ground?
but then more 'why?
' why have they dared to march so many miles upon her peaceful bosom, frighting her palefaced villages with war and ostentation of despised arms?
comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, and in my loyal bosom lies his power.
were i but now the lord of such hot youth as when brave gaunt, thy father, and myself rescued the black prince, that young mars of men, from forth the ranks of many thousand french, o, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee and minister correction to thy fault!
my gracious uncle, on what condition stands it and wherein?
even in condition of the worst degree, thou art a banish'd man, and here art come before the expiration of thy time, in braving arms against thy sovereign.
as i was banish'd, i was banish'd hereford but as i come, i come for lancaster.
and, noble uncle, i beseech your grace you are my father, for methinks in you i see old gaunt alive o, then, my father, will you permit that i shall stand condemn'd a wandering vagabond my rights and royalties pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away to upstart unthrifts?
wherefore was i born?
if that my cousin king be king of england, it must be granted i am duke of lancaster.
you have a son, aumerle, my noble cousin had you first died, and he been thus trod down, he should have found his uncle gaunt a father, to rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
i am denied to sue my livery here, and yet my letters my father's goods are all distrain'd and sold, and these and all are all amiss employ'd.
what would you have me do?
i am a subject, attorneys are denied me and therefore, personally i lay my claim to my inheritance of free descent.
the noble duke hath been too much abused.
it stands your grace upon to do him right.
base men by his endowments are made great.
my lords of england, i have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs and laboured all i could to do him right but in this kind to come, in braving arms, be his own carver and cut out his way, to find out right with wrong, it may not be and you that do abet him in this kind cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
the noble duke hath sworn his coming is but for his own and for the right of that we all have strongly sworn to give him aid and let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
well, well, i cannot mend it, i must needs confess, but if i could, by him that gave me life, i would attach you all and make you stoop unto the sovereign mercy of the king but since i cannot, be it known to you i do remain as neuter.
so, fare you well unless you please to enter in the castle and there repose you for this night.
an offer, uncle, but we must win your grace to go with us to bristol castle, which they say is held by bushy, bagot and their complices, the caterpillars of the commonwealth, which i have sworn to weed and pluck away.
but yet i'll pause for i am loath to break our country's laws.
nor friends nor foes, things past redress are now with me past care.
my lord of salisbury, we have stay'd ten days, and hardly kept our countrymen together, and yet we hear no tidings from the king farewell.
stay yet another day, the king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
'tis thought the king is dead we will not stay.
the baytrees in our country are all wither'd and meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven the palefaced moon looks bloody on the earth and leanlook'd prophets whisper fearful change rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap, the one in fear to lose what they enjoy, these signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
our countrymen are gone and fled, as well assured richard their king is dead.
ah, richard, with the eyes of heavy mind i see thy glory like a shooting star fall to the base earth from the firmament.
thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, witnessing storms to come, thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, and crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
bring forth these men.
bushy and green, i will not vex your souls since presently your souls must part your bodies with too much urging your pernicious lives, for 'twere no charity yet, to wash your blood from off my hands, here in the view of men i will unfold some causes of your deaths.
you have misled a prince, a royal king, a happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, you have in manner with your sinful hours made a divorce betwixt his queen and him, broke the possession of a royal bed and stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks with tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, near to the king in blood, and near in love till you did make him misinterpret me, have stoop'd my neck under your injuries, and sigh'd my english breath in foreign clouds, eating the bitter bread of banishment whilst you have fed upon my signories, dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods, from my own windows torn my household coat, razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign, save men's opinions and my living blood, to show the world i am a gentleman.
this and much more, much more than twice all this, condemns you to the death.
see them deliver'd over to execution and the hand of death.
more welcome is the stroke of death to me than bolingbroke to england.
lords, farewell.
my comfort is that heaven will take our souls and plague injustice with the pains of hell.
my lord northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
uncle, you say the queen is at your house for god's sake, tell her i send to her my kind commends take special care my greetings be deliver'd.
a gentleman of mine i have dispatch'd with letters of your love to her at large.
thank, gentle uncle.
come, lords, away.
awhile to work, and after holiday.
barkloughly castle call they this at hand?
yea, my lord.
how brooks your grace the air, after your late tossing on the breaking seas?
i weep for joy to stand upon my kingdom once again.
dear earth, i do salute thee with my hand, though rebels wound thee with their horses' as a longparted mother with her child plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting, so, weeping, smiling, greet i thee, my earth, and do thee favours with my royal hands.
feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth, nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense but let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom, and heavygaited toads lie in their way, doing annoyance to the treacherous feet yield stinging nettles to mine enemies and when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, guard it, i pray thee, with a lurking adder whose double tongue may with a mortal touch throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
mock not my senseless conjuration, this earth shall have a feeling and these stones prove armed soldiers, ere her native king shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
fear not, that power that made you king hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
the means that heaven yields must be embraced, and not neglected else, if heaven would, and we will not, heaven's offer we refuse, the proffer'd means of succor and redress.
he means, my lord, that we are too remiss whilst bolingbroke, through our security, grows strong and great in substance and in power.
discomfortable cousin!
know'st thou not that when the searching eye of heaven is hid, behind the globe, that lights the lower world, then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen in murders and in outrage, boldly here but when from under this terrestrial ball he fires the proud tops of the eastern pines and darts his light through every guilty hole, then murders, treasons and detested sins, the cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs, stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
so when this thief, this traitor, bolingbroke, who all this while hath revell'd in the night whilst we were wandering with the antipodes, shall see us rising in our throne, the east, his treasons will sit blushing in his face, not able to endure the sight of day, but selfaffrighted tremble at his sin.
not all the water in the rough rude sea can wash the balm off from an anointed king the breath of worldly men cannot depose for every man that bolingbroke hath press'd to lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, god for his richard hath in heavenly pay then, if angels fight, weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?
nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, discomfort guides my tongue and bids me speak of nothing but despair.
one day too late, i fear me, noble lord, o, call back yesterday, bid time return, and thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
today, today, unhappy day, too late, o'erthrows thy joys, friends, for all the welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.
are gone to bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
comfort, my liege why looks your grace so pale?
but now the blood of twenty thousand men did triumph in my face, and they are fled and, till so much blood thither come again, have i not reason to look pale and dead?
all souls that will be safe fly from my side, for time hath set a blot upon my pride.
comfort, my liege remember who you are.
i had forgot myself am i not king?
awake, thou coward majesty!
thou sleepest.
is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
arm, arm, my name!
a puny subject strikes at thy great glory.
look not to the ground, are we not high?
i know my uncle york hath power enough to serve our turn.
but who comes here?
more health and happiness betide my liege than can my caretuned tongue deliver him!
mine ear is open and my heart prepared the worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
say, is my kingdom lost?
why, 'twas my care and what loss is it to be rid of care?
strives bolingbroke to be as great as we?
greater he shall not be if he serve god, we' revolt our subjects?
that we cannot mend cry woe, destruction, the worst is death, and death will have his day.
glad am i that your highness is so arm'd to bear the tidings of calamity.
like an unseasonable stormy day, which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, as if the world were all dissolved to tears, so high above his limits swells the rage of bolingbroke, covering your fearful land with hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
whitebeards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps against thy majesty boys, with women's voices, strive to speak big and clap their female joints the very beadsmen learn to bend their bows of doublefatal yew against thy state yea, distaffwomen manage rusty bills both young and old rebel, and all goes worse than i have power to tell.
too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
where is the earl of wiltshire?
where is bagot?
what is become of bushy?
where is green?
that they have let the dangerous enemy measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
if we prevail, i warrant they have made peace with bolingbroke.
peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
o villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
snakes, in my heartblood warm'd, that sting my heart!
three judases, each one thrice worse than judas!
would they make peace?
terrible hell make war upon their spotted souls for this offence!
sweet love, i see, changing his property, again uncurse their souls their peace is made with heads, and not with hands those whom you curse have felt the worst of death's destroying wound and lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
is bushy, green, and the earl of wiltshire dead?
ay, all of them at bristol lost their heads.
where is the duke my father with his power?
no matter where let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs make dust our paper and with rainy eyes write sorrow on the bosom of the earth, let' and yet not so, for what can we bequeath save our deposed bodies to the ground?
our lands, our lives and all are bolingbroke's, and nothing can we call our own but death and that small model of the barren earth which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
for god's sake, let us sit upon the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings how some have been deposed some slain in war, some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed some poison' some sleeping kill'd all murder' for within the hollow crown that rounds the mortal temples of a king keeps death his court and there the antic sits, scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp, allowing him a breath, a little scene, to monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks, infusing him with self and vain conceit, as if this flesh which walls about our life, were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus comes at the last and with a little pin bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood throw away respect, tradition, form and ceremonious duty, i live with bread like you, feel want, taste grief, subjected thus, how can you say to me, i am a king?
my lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes, but presently prevent the ways to wail.
to fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength, gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, and so your follies fight against yourself.
fear and be slain and fight and die is death destroying death where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
my father hath a power inquire of him and learn to make a body of a limb.
proud bolingbroke, i come to change blows with thee for our day of doom.
this ague fit of fear is overblown an easy task it is to win our own.
say, scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
men judge by the complexion of the sky so may you by my dull and heavy eye, my tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
i play the torturer, by small and small your uncle york is join'd with bolingbroke, and all your northern castles yielded up, and all your southern gentlemen in arms upon his party.
thou hast said enough.
beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth of that sweet way i was in to despair!
what say you now?
what comfort have we now?
by heaven, i'll hate him everlastingly that bids me be of comfort any more.
there i'll pine away a king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
that power i have, discharge and let them go to ear the land that hath some hope to grow, let no man speak again to alter this, for counsel is but vain.
my liege, one word.
he does me double wrong that wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
let them hence away, from richard's night to bolingbroke's fair day.
so that by this intelligence we learn the welshmen are dispersed, and salisbury is gone to meet the king, who lately landed with some few private friends upon this coast.
the news is very fair and good, richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
it would beseem the lord northumberland to say '' alack the heavy day when such a sacred king should hide his head.
your grace mistakes only to be brief left i his title out.
the time hath been, would you have been so brief with him, he would have been so brief with you, to shorten you, for taking so the head, your whole head's length.
mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
take not, good cousin, further than you should.
lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
i know it, uncle, and oppose not myself against their will.
but who comes here?
welcome, what, will not this castle yield?
the castle royally is mann'd, my lord, against thy entrance.
royally!
why, it contains no king?
yes, my good lord, it doth contain a king king richard lies and with him are the lord aumerle, lord salisbury, sir stephen scroop, besides a clergyman of holy reverence who, i cannot learn.
o, belike it is the bishop of carlisle.
noble lords, go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley into his ruin'd ears, henry bolingbroke on both his knees doth kiss king richard's hand and sends allegiance and true faith of heart to his most royal person, hither come even at his feet to lay my arms and power, provided that my banishment repeal'd if not, i'll use the advantage of my power and lay the summer's dust with showers of blood rain'd from the wounds of slaughter' the which, how far off from the mind of bolingbroke it is, such crimson tempest should bedrench the fresh green lap of fair king richard's land, my stooping duty tenderly shall show.
go, signify as much, while here we march upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
let's march without the noise of threatening drum, that from this castle's tatter'd battlements our fair appointments may be well perused.
methinks king richard and myself should meet with no less terror than the elements of fire and water, when their thundering shock at meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
be he the fire, i' the rage be his, whilst on the earth i rain my waters on the earth, and not on him.
march on, and mark king richard how he looks.
see, see, king richard doth himself appear, as doth the blushing discontented sun from out the fiery portal of the east, when he perceives the envious clouds are bent to dim his glory and to stain the track of his bright passage to the occident.
behold, his eye, as bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth alack, alack, for woe, that any harm should stain so fair a show!
we are amazed and thus long have we stood to watch the fearful bending of thy knee, and if we be, how dare thy joints forget to pay their awful duty to our presence?
if we be not, show us the hand of god that hath dismissed us from our stewardship for well we know, no hand of blood and bone can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre, unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
and though you think that all, as you have done, have torn their souls by turning them from us, and we are barren and bereft of friends yet know, my master, god omnipotent, is mustering in his clouds on our behalf armies of pestilence and they shall strike your children yet unborn and unbegot, that lift your vassal hands against my head and threat the glory of my precious crown.
tell bolingbrokefor yond methinks he stands that every stride he makes upon my land he is come to open the purple testament of bleeding war but ere the crown he looks for live in peace, ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons shall ill become the flower of england's face, change the complexion of her maidpale peace to scarlet indignation and bedew her pastures' grass with faithful english blood.
the king of heaven forbid our lord the king should so with civil and uncivil arms be rush'd upon!
thy thrice noble cousin harry bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand and by the honourable tomb he swears, that stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, and by the royalties of both your bloods, currents that spring from one most gracious head, and by the buried hand of warlike gaunt, and by the worth and honour of himself, comprising all that may be sworn or said, his coming hither hath no further scope than for his lineal royalties and to beg which on thy royal party granted once, his glittering arms he will commend to rust, his barbed steeds to stables, and his heart to faithful service of your majesty.
this swears he, as he is a prince, is just and, as i am a gentleman, i credit him.
northumberland, his noble cousin is right welcome hither and all the number of his fair demands shall be accomplish' with all the gracious utterance thou hast speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
we do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, to look so poorly and to speak so fair?
shall we call back northumberland, and send defiance to the traitor, and so die?
no, good my lord let's fight with gentle words till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
o god, o god!
that e'er this tongue of mine, that laid the sentence of dread banishment on yon proud man, should take it off again with words of sooth!
o that i were as great as is my grief, or lesser than my name!
or that i could forget what i have been, or not remember what i must be now!
swell'st thou, proud heart?
i'll give thee scope to beat, since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
northumberland comes back from bolingbroke.
what must the king do now?
must he submit?
must he be deposed?
must he lose the name of king?
o' god's name, i'll give my jewels for a set of beads, my gorgeous palace for a hermitage, my gay apparel for an almsman's gown, my figured goblets for a dish of wood, my sceptre for a palmer's walking staff, my subjects for a pair of carved saints and my large kingdom for a little grave, a little little grave, an obscure grave or i'll be buried in the king's highway, some way of common trade, where subjects' feet may hourly trample on their sovereign's head for on my heart they tread now whilst i live and buried once, why not upon my head?
aumerle, thou weep'st, my tenderhearted cousin!
we'll make foul weather with despised tears our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn, and make a dearth in this revolting land.
or shall we play the wantons with our woes, and make some pretty match with shedding tears?
as thus, to drop them still upon one place, till they have fretted us a pair of graves within the earth and, therein laid,there lies two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
would not this ill do well?
well, well, i see i talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
most mighty prince, my lord northumberland, what says king bolingbroke?
will his majesty give richard leave to live till richard die?
you make a leg, and bolingbroke says ay.
my lord, in the base court he doth attend to speak with you may it please you to come down.
down, down i come like glistering phaethon, wanting the manage of unruly jades.
in the base court?
base court, where kings grow base, to come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
in the base court?
come down?
down, court!
down, king!
for nightowls shriek where mounting larks should sing.
what says his majesty?
sorrow and grief of heart makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man yet he is come.
stand all apart, and show fair duty to his majesty.
my gracious lord, fair cousin, you debase your princely knee me rather had my heart might feel your love than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
up, cousin, up your heart is up, i know, thus high at least, although your knee be low.
my gracious lord, i come but for mine own.
your own is yours, and i am yours, and all.
so far be mine, my most redoubted lord, as my true service shall deserve your love.
they well deserve to have, that know the strong'st and surest way to get.
uncle, nay, dry your eyes tears show their love, but want their remedies.
cousin, i am too young to be your father, though you are old enough to be my heir.
what you will have, i'll give, and willing too for do we must what force will have us do.
set on towards london, cousin, is it so?
yea, my good lord.
then i must not say no.
what sport shall we devise here in this garden, to drive away the heavy thought of care?
madam, we'll play at bowls.
'twill make me think the world is full of rubs, and that my fortune rubs against the bias.
madam, we'll dance.
my legs can keep no measure in delight, therefore, no dancing, girl some other sport.
madam, we'll tell tales.
of sorrow or of joy?
of either, madam.
of neither, for of joy, being altogether wanting, it doth remember me the more of sorrow or if of grief, being altogether had, for what i have i need not to repeat and what i want it boots not to complain.
madam, i'll sing.
'tis well that thou hast cause but thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
i could weep, madam, would it do you good.
and i could sing, would weeping do me good, and never borrow any tear of thee.
but stay, let's step into the shadow of these trees.
my wretchedness unto a row of pins, they'll talk of state for every one doth so against a change woe is forerun with woe.
go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks, which, like unruly children, make their sire give some supportance to the bending twigs.
go thou, and like an executioner, cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, all must be even in our government.
you thus employ'd, i will go root away the noisome weeds, which without profit suck the soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
why should we in the compass of a pale keep law and form and due proportion, showing, as in a model, our firm estate, when our seawalled garden, the whole land, is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up, her fruittrees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd, her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs swarming with caterpillars?
he that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring the weeds which his broadspreading leaves did shelter, that seem'd in eating him to hold him up, are pluck'd up root and all by bolingbroke, i mean the earl of wiltshire, bushy, green.
what, are they dead?
they are and bolingbroke hath seized the wasteful king.
o, what pity is it that he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land as we this garden!
we at time of year do wound the bark, the skin of our fruittrees, lest, being overproud in sap and blood, had he done so to great and growing men, they might have lived to bear and he to taste superfluous branches we lop away, had he done so, himself had borne the crown, which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
what, think you then the king shall be deposed?
depress'd he is already, and deposed ' letters came last night to a dear friend of the good duke of york's, that tell black tidings.
o, i am press'd to death through want of speaking!
thou, old adam's likeness, set to dress this garden, how dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
what eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee to make a second fall of cursed man?
why dost thou say king richard is deposed?
darest thou, thou little better thing than earth, divine his downfall?
say, where, when, and how, camest thou by this ill tidings?
speak, thou wretch.
pardon me, little joy have i to breathe this news yet what i say is true.
king richard, he is in the mighty hold their fortunes both are weigh' in your lord's scale is nothing but himself, and some few vanities that make him light but in the balance of great bolingbroke, besides himself, are all the english peers, and with that odds he weighs king richard down.
post you to london, and you will find it so i speak no more than every one doth know.
nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, doth not thy embassage belong to me, and am i last that knows it?
o, thou think'st to serve me last, that i may longest keep thy sorrow in my breast.
come, ladies, go, to meet at london london's king in woe.
what, was i born to this, that my sad look should grace the triumph of great bolingbroke?
gardener, for telling me these news of woe, pray god the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
poor queen!
so that thy state might be no worse, i would my skill were subject to thy curse.
here did she fall a tear here in this place i'll set a bank of rue, rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen, in the remembrance of a weeping queen.
call forth bagot.
now, bagot, freely speak thy mind what thou dost know of noble gloucester's death, who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd the bloody office of his timeless end.
then set before my face the lord aumerle.
cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
my lord aumerle, i know your daring tongue scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
in that dead time when gloucester's death was plotted, i heard you say, 'is not my arm of length, that reacheth from the restful english court as far as calais, to mine uncle's head?
' amongst much other talk, that very time, i heard you say that you had rather refuse the offer of an hundred thousand crowns than bolingbroke's return to england adding withal how blest this land would be in this your cousin's death.
princes and noble lords, what answer shall i make to this base man?
shall i so much dishonour my fair stars, on equal terms to give him chastisement?
either i must, or have mine honour soil'd with the attainder of his slanderous lips.
there is my gage, the manual seal of death, i say, thou liest, and will maintain what thou hast said is false in thy heartblood, though being all too base to stain the temper of my knightly sword.
bagot, forbear thou shalt not take it up.
excepting one, i would he were the best in all this presence that hath moved me so.
if that thy valour stand on sympathy, there is my gage, aumerle, by that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st, i heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it that thou wert cause of noble gloucester's death.
if thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest and i will turn thy falsehood to thy heart, where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
now by my soul, i would it were this hour.
fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
aumerle, thou liest his honour is as true in this appeal as thou art all unjust and that thou art so, there i throw my gage, to prove it on thee to the extremest point seize it, if thou darest.
an if i do not, may my hands rot off and never brandish more revengeful steel over the glittering helmet of my foe!
i task the earth to the like, forsworn aumerle and spur thee on with full as many lies as may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear there is my honour's pawn engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
who sets me else?
by heaven, i' i have a thousand spirits in one breast, to answer twenty thousand such as you.
my lord fitzwater, i do remember well the very time aumerle and you did talk.
' you were in presence then and you can witness with me this is true.
as false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
surrey, thou liest.
dishonourable boy!
that lie shall lie so heavy on my sword, that it shall render vengeance and revenge till thou the liegiver and that lie do lie in earth as quiet as thy father' in proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
how fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
if i dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live, i dare meet surrey in a wilderness, and spit upon him, whilst i say he lies, and lies, there is my bond of faith, to tie thee to my strong correction.
as i intend to thrive in this new world, besides, i heard the banish'd norfolk say that thou, aumerle, didst send two of thy men to execute the noble duke at calais.
some honest christian trust me with a gage here do i throw down this, if he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
these differences shall all rest under gage till norfolk be repeal' repeal'd he shall be, and, though mine enemy, restored again when he's return'd, against aumerle we will enforce his trial.
that honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
many a time hath banish'd norfolk fought for jesu christ in glorious christian field, streaming the ensign of the christian cross against black pagans, turks, and toil'd with works of war, retired himself to italy and there at venice gave his body to that pleasant country's earth, and his pure soul unto his captain christ, under whose colours he had fought so long.
why, bishop, is norfolk dead?
as surely as i live, my lord.
sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom of good old abraham!
lords appellants, your differences shall all rest under gage till we assign you to your days of trial.
great duke of lancaster, i come to thee from plumepluck'd richard who with willing soul adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields ascend his throne, descending now from him and long live henry, fourth of that name!
in god's name, i'll ascend the regal throne.
marry.
god forbid!
worst in this royal presence may i speak, yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
would god that any in this noble presence were enough noble to be upright judge of noble richard!
then true noblesse would learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
what subject can give sentence on his king?
and who sits here that is not richard's subject?
thieves are not judged but they are by to hear, although apparent guilt be seen in them and shall the figure of god's majesty, his captain, steward, deputyelect, anointed, crowned, planted many years, be judged by subject and inferior breath, and he himself not present?
o, forfend it, god, that in a christian climate souls refined should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
i speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, stirr'd up by god, my lord of hereford here, whom you call king, is a foul traitor to proud hereford' and if you crown him, the blood of english shall manure the ground, and future ages groan for this foul act peace shall go sleep with turks and infidels, and in this seat of peace tumultuous wars shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound disorder, horror, fear and mutiny shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd the field of golgotha and dead men's skulls.
o, if you raise this house against this house, it will the woefullest division prove that ever fell upon this cursed earth.
prevent it, resist it, let it not be so, lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
well have you argued, sir and, for your pains, of capital treason we arrest you here.
my lord of westminster, be it your charge to keep him safely till his day of trial.
may it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
fetch hither richard, that in common view he may surrender so we shall proceed without suspicion.
i will be his conduct.
lords, you that here are under our arrest, procure your sureties for your days of answer.
little are we beholding to your love, and little look'd for at your helping hands.
alack, why am i sent for to a king, before i have shook off the regal thoughts wherewith i reign'd?
i hardly yet have learn'd to insinuate, flatter, bow, give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me to this submission.
yet i well remember were they not mine?
did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!
' to me?
but he, in twelve, i, in twelve thousand, none.
god save the king!
will no man say amen?
am i both priest and clerk?
well then, amen.
god save the king!
although i be not he and yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
to do what service am i sent for hither?
to do that office of thine own good will which tired majesty did make thee offer, the resignation of thy state and crown to henry bolingbroke.
give me the crown.
here, cousin, seize the crown on this side my hand, and on that side yours.
now is this golden crown like a deep well that owes two buckets, filling one another, the emptier ever dancing in the air, the other down, that bucket down and full of tears am i, drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
i thought you had been willing to resign.
my crown i am you may my glories and my state depose, but not my griefs still am i king of those.
part of your cares you give me with your crown.
your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
my care is loss of care, by old care done your care is gain of care, the cares i give i have, though given away they tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
are you contented to resign the crown?
ay, no no, ay for i must nothing be therefore no no, for i resign to thee.
now mark me, how i will undo myself i give this heavy weight from off my head and this unwieldy sceptre from my hand, the pride of kingly sway from out my heart with mine own tears i wash away my balm, with mine own hands i give away my crown, with mine own tongue deny my sacred state, with mine own breath release all duty' all pomp and majesty i do forswear my manors, rents, revenues i forego my acts, decrees, god pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
god keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, and thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
long mayst thou live in richard's seat to sit, and soon lie richard in an earthly pit!
god save king harry, unking'd richard says, and send him many years of sunshine days!
what more remains?
no more, but that you read these accusations and these grievous crimes committed by your person and your followers against the state and profit of this land that, by confessing them, the souls of men may deem that you are worthily deposed.
must i do so?
and must i ravel out my weavedup folly?
gentle northumberland, if thy offences were upon record, would it not shame thee in so fair a troop to read a lecture of them?
if thou wouldst, there shouldst thou find one heinous article, containing the deposing of a king and cracking the strong warrant of an oath, mark'd with a blot, damn' nay, all of you that stand and look upon, whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, though some of you with pilate wash your hands showing an outward pity yet you pilates have here deliver'd me to my sour cross, and water cannot wash away your sin.
my lord, dispatch read o'er these articles.
mine eyes are full of tears, and yet salt water blinds them not so much but they can see a sort of traitors here.
nay, if i turn mine eyes upon myself, i find myself a traitor with the rest for i have given here my soul's consent to undeck the pompous body of a king made glory base and sovereignty a slave, proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
my lord, no lord of thine, thou haught insulting man, nor no man's lord i have no name, no title, no, not that name was given me at the font, but 'tis usurp' alack the heavy day, that i have worn so many winters out, and know not now what name to call myself!
o that i were a mockery king of snow, standing before the sun of bolingbroke, to melt myself away in waterdrops!
good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, an if my word be sterling yet in england, let it command a mirror hither straight, that it may show me what a face i have, since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
go some of you and fetch a lookingglass.
read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
fiend, thou torment'st me ere i come to hell!
urge it no more, my lord northumberland.
the commons will not then be satisfied.
i'll read enough, when i do see the very book indeed where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
give me the glass, and therein will i read.
no deeper wrinkles yet?
hath sorrow struck so many blows upon this face of mine, and made no deeper wounds?
o flattering glass, like to my followers in prosperity, thou dost beguile me!
was this face the face that every day under his household roof did keep ten thousand men?
was this the face that, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
was this the face that faced so many follies, and was at last outfaced by bolingbroke?
as brittle as the glory is the face for there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
mark, silent king, the moral of this sport, how soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
the shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd the shadow or your face.
say that again.
the shadow of my sorrow!
let' 'tis very true, my grief lies all within and these external manners of laments are merely shadows to the unseen grief that swells with silence in the tortured soul and i thank thee, king, for thy great bounty, that not only givest me cause to wail but teachest me the way how to lament the cause.
i'll beg one boon, and then be gone and trouble you no more.
shall i obtain it?
name it, fair cousin.
'fair cousin'?
for when i was a king, my flatterers were then but subjects being now a subject, i have a king here to my flatterer.
being so great, i have no need to beg.
yet ask.
and shall i have?
you shall.
then give me leave to go.
whither?
whither you will, so i were from your sights.
go, some of you convey him to the tower.
o, good!
convey?
conveyers are you all, that rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
on wednesday next we solemnly set down lords, prepare yourselves.
a woeful pageant have we here beheld.
the woe's to come the children yet unborn.
shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
you holy clergymen, is there no plot to rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
my lord, before i freely speak my mind herein, you shall not only take the sacrament to bury mine intents, but also to effect whatever i shall happen to devise.
i see your brows are full of discontent, come home with me to supper and i'll lay a plot shall show us all a merry day.
this way the king will come this is the way to julius caesar's illerected tower, to whose flint bosom my condemned lord is doom' here let us rest, if this rebellious earth have any resting for her true king's queen.
but soft, but see, or rather do not see, yet look up, behold, that you in pity may dissolve to dew, and wash him fresh again with truelove tears.
ah, thou, the model where old troy did stand, thou map of honour, thou king richard's tomb, and not king richard thou most beauteous inn, why should hardfavour'd grief be lodged in thee, when triumph is become an alehouse guest?
join not with grief, fair woman, do not so, learn, good soul, to think our former state a happy dream from which awaked, the truth of what we are i am sworn brother, sweet, to grim necessity, and he and i will keep a league till death.
hie thee to france our holy lives must win a new world's crown, which our profane hours here have stricken down.
what, is my richard both in shape and mind transform'd and weaken'd?
hath bolingbroke deposed thine intellect?
hath he been in thy heart?
the lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, and wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage to be o'erpower'd and wilt thou, pupillike, take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod, and fawn on rage with base humility, which art a lion and a king of beasts?
a king of beasts, indeed if aught but beasts, i had been still a happy king of men.
good sometime queen, think i am dead and that even here thou takest, as from my deathbed, thy last living leave.
in winter's tedious nights sit by the fire with good old folks and let them tell thee tales of woeful ages long ago betid and ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs, tell thou the lamentable tale of me for why, the senseless brands will sympathize the heavy accent of thy moving tongue and in compassion weep the fire out and some will mourn in ashes, some coalblack, for the deposing of a rightful king.
my lord, you must to pomfret, not unto the tower.
and, madam, there is order ta'en for you with all swift speed you must away to france.
northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal the mounting bolingbroke ascends my throne, the time shall not be many hours of age more than it is ere foul sin gathering head thou shalt think, though he divide the realm and give thee half, it is too little, helping him to all and he shall think that thou, which know'st the way to plant unrightful kings, wilt know again, being ne'er so little urged, another way to pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
the love of wicked men converts to fear that fear to hate, and hate turns one or both to worthy danger and deserved death.
my guilt be on my head, and there an end.
take leave and part for you must part forthwith.
doubly divorced!
bad men, you violate a twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me, and then betwixt me and my married wife.
let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me and yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
part us, northumberland i toward the north, where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime from whence, set forth in pomp, she came adorned hither like sweet may, sent back like hallowmas or short'st of day.
and must we be divided?
must we part?
ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
banish us both and send the king with me.
that were some love but little policy.
then whither he goes, thither let me go.
so two, together weeping, make one woe.
weep thou for me in france, i for thee here better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
go, count thy way with sighs i mine with groans.
so longest way shall have the longest moans.
twice for one step i'll groan, the way being short, and piece the way out with a heavy heart.
come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, since, wedding it, there is such length in grief one kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part thus give i mine, and thus take i thy heart.
give me mine own again 'twere no good part to take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
so, now i have mine own again, be gone, that i might strive to kill it with a groan.
once more, adieu the rest let sorrow say.
my lord, you told me you would tell the rest, when weeping made you break the story off, of our two cousins coming into london.
where did i leave?
at that sad stop, my lord, where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops threw dust and rubbish on king richard's head.
then, as i said, the duke, great bolingbroke, mounted upon a hot and fiery steed which his aspiring rider seem'd to know, with slow but stately pace kept on his course, whilst all tongues cried 'god save thee, bolingbroke!
' you would have thought the very windows spake, so many greedy looks of young and old through casements darted their desiring eyes upon his visage, and that all the walls with painted imagery had said at once 'jesu preserve thee!
welcome, bolingbroke!
' whilst he, from the one side to the other turning, bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck, 'i thank you,' and thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
alack, poor richard!
where rode he the whilst?
as in a theatre, the eyes of men, after a wellgraced actor leaves the stage, are idly bent on him that enters next, thinking his prattle to be tedious even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes did scowl on gentle richard no man cried 'god save him!
' which with such gentle sorrow he shook off, his face still combating with tears and smiles, the badges of his grief and patience, that had not god, for some strong purpose, steel'd the hearts of men, they must perforce have melted and barbarism itself have pitied him.
but heaven hath a hand in these events, to whose high will we bound our calm contents.
to bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, whose state and honour i for aye allow.
here comes my son aumerle.
aumerle that was but that is lost for being richard's friend, and, madam, i am in parliament pledge for his truth and lasting fealty to the newmade king.
welcome, who are the violets now that strew the green lap of the new come spring?
madam, i know not, god knows i had as lief be none as one.
well, bear you well in this new spring of time, lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
what news from oxford?
hold those justs and triumphs?
for aught i know, my lord, they do.
you will be there, i know.
if god prevent not, i purpose so.
what seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
yea, look'st thou pale?
let me see the writing.
my lord, 'tis nothing.
no matter, then, who see it i will be satisfied let me see the writing.
it is a matter of small consequence, which for some reasons i would not have seen.
which for some reasons, sir, i mean to see.
i fear, i fear, what should you fear?
'tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into for gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
bound to himself!
what doth he with a bond that he is bound to?
wife, thou art a fool.
boy, let me see the writing.
i do beseech you, pardon me i may not show it.
i will be satisfied let me see it, i say.
treason!
foul treason!
villain!
traitor!
slave!
what is the matter, my lord?
who is within there?
saddle my horse.
god for his mercy, what treachery is here!
why, what is it, my lord?
give me my boots, i say saddle my horse.
now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth, i will appeach the villain.
what is the matter?
peace, foolish woman.
i will not peace.
what is the matter, aumerle.
good mother, be content it is no more than my poor life must answer.
thy life answer!
i will unto the king.
strike him, aumerle.
poor boy, thou art amazed.
hence, villain!
never more come in my sight.
give me my boots, i say.
why, york, what wilt thou do?
wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
have we more sons?
or are we like to have?
is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
and wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age, and rob me of a happy mother's name?
is he not like thee?
is he not thine own?
thou fond mad woman, wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
a dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament, and interchangeably set down their hands, to kill the king at oxford.
he shall be none we' then what is that to him?
away, fond woman!
were he twenty times my son, i would appeach him.
hadst thou groan'd for him as i have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
but now i know thy mind thou dost suspect that i have been disloyal to thy bed, and that he is a bastard, sweet york, sweet husband, he is as like thee as a man may be, not like to me, or any of my kin, and yet i love him.
make way, unruly woman!
after, aumerle!
mount thee upon his horse spur post, and get before him to the king, and beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
i'll not be long behind though i be old, and never will i rise up from the ground till bolingbroke have pardon'd thee.
away, be gone!
can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
'tis full three months since i did see him last if any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
i would to god, my lords, inquire at london, 'mongst the taverns there, for there, they say, he daily doth frequent, with unrestrained loose companions, even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes, and beat our watch, and rob our passengers which he, young wanton and effeminate boy, takes on the point of honour to support so dissolute a crew.
my lord, some two days since i saw the prince, and told him of those triumphs held at oxford.
and what said the gallant?
his answer was, he would unto the stews, and from the common'st creature pluck a glove, and wear it as a favour and with that he would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
as dissolute as desperate yet through both i see some sparks of better hope, which elder years may happily bring forth.
but who comes here?
where is the king?
what means our cousin, that he stares and looks so wildly?
god save your grace!
i do beseech your majesty, to have some conference with your grace alone.
withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
what is the matter with our cousin now?
for ever may my knees grow to the earth, my tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth unless a pardon ere i rise or speak.
intended or committed was this fault?
if on the first, how heinous e'er it be, to win thy afterlove i pardon thee.
then give me leave that i may turn the key, that no man enter till my tale be done.
have thy desire.
villain, i'll make thee safe.
stay thy revengeful hand thou hast no cause to fear.
what is the matter, uncle?
speak recover breath tell us how near is danger, that we may arm us to encounter it.
peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know the treason that my haste forbids me show.
remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass' i do repent me read not my name there my heart is not confederate with my hand.
it was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
i tore it from the traitor's bosom, king fear, and not love, forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove a serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
o heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
o loyal father of a treacherous son!
thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain, from when this stream through muddy passages hath held his current and defiled himself!
thy overflow of good converts to bad, and thy abundant goodness shall excuse this deadly blot in thy digressing son.
so shall my virtue be his vice's bawd and he shall spend mine honour with his shame, as thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
mine honour lives when his dishonour dies, thou kill'st me in his life giving him breath, the traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
what shrillvoiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
a woman, and thy aunt, great king 'tis i.
speak with me, pity me, open the door.
a beggar begs that never begg'd before.
our scene is alter'd from a serious thing, and now changed to 'the beggar and the king.
' my dangerous cousin, i know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
if thou do pardon, whosoever pray, more sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
this fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound this let alone will all the rest confound.
o king, believe not this hardhearted man!
love loving not itself none other can.
thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
sweet york, be patient.
hear me, gentle liege.
rise up, good aunt.
not yet, for ever will i walk upon my knees, and never see day that the happy sees, till thou give joy until thou bid me joy, by pardoning rutland, my transgressing boy.
unto my mother's prayers i bend my knee.
against them both my true joints bended be.
ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
pleads he in earnest?
look upon his face his eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest his words come from his mouth, he prays but faintly and would be denied his weary joints would gladly rise, i know his prayers are full of false hypocrisy ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
our prayers do outpray his then let them have that mercy which true prayer ought to have.
good aunt, stand up.
nay, do not say, 'stand up' say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.
' and if i were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 'pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
i never long'd to hear a word till now say 'pardon,' king the word is short, but not so short as sweet no word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
speak it in french, king say, 'pardonne moi.
' dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
ah, my sour husband, my hardhearted lord, that set'st the word itself against the word!
speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land the chopping french we do not understand.
thine eye begins to speak set thy tongue there or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear that hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce, pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
good aunt, stand up.
i do not sue to stand pardon is all the suit i have in hand.
i pardon him, as god shall pardon me.
o happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
speak it again twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain, but makes one pardon strong.
with all my heart i pardon him.
a god on earth thou art.
but for our trusty brotherinlaw and the abbot, with all the rest of that consorted crew, destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
good uncle, help to order several powers to oxford, or where' they shall not live within this world, i swear, but i will have them, if i once know where.
uncle, and, cousin too, your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
come, i pray god make thee new.
didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, 'have i no friend will rid me of this living fear?
' was it not so?
these were his very words.
'have i no friend?
' he spake it twice, and urged it twice together, did he not?
he did.
and speaking it, he wistly look'd on me, and who should say, 'i would thou wert the man' that would divorce this terror from my heart' meaning the king at pomfret.
come, let' i am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.
i have been studying how i may compare and for because the world is populous and here is not a creature but myself, i cannot do it yet i'll hammer it out.
my brain i'll prove the female to my soul, my soul the father and these two beget a generation of stillbreeding thoughts, and these same thoughts people this little world, in humours like the people of this world, for no thought is contented.
the better sort, as thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd with scruples and do set the word itself as thus, 'come, little ones,' and then again, 'it is as hard to come as for a camel to thread the postern of a small needle's eye.
' thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot unlikely wonders how these vain weak nails may tear a passage through the flinty ribs of this hard world, my ragged prison walls, and, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
thoughts tending to content flatter themselves that they are not the first of fortune's slaves, nor shall not be the last like silly beggars who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, that many have and others must sit there and in this thought they find a kind of ease, bearing their own misfortunes on the back of such as have before endured the like.
thus play i in one person many people, sometimes am i king then treasons make me wish myself a beggar, then crushing penury persuades me i was better when a king then am i king' and by and by think that i am unking'd by bolingbroke, but whate'er i be, nor i nor any man that but man is with nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased with being nothing.
music do i hear?
ha, ha!
how sour sweet music is, when time is broke and no proportion kept!
so is it in the music of men's lives.
and here have i the daintiness of ear to cheque time broke in a disorder'd string but for the concord of my state and time had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
i wasted time, and now doth time waste me my thoughts are minutes and with sighs they jar their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, whereto my finger, like a dial's point, is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, so sighs and tears and groans show minutes, times, but my time runs posting on in bolingbroke's proud joy, while i stand fooling here, his jack o' the clock.
this music mads me let it sound no more for though it have holp madmen to their wits, in me it seems it will make wise men mad.
yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
for 'tis a sign of love and love to richard is a strange brooch in this allhating world.
hail, royal prince!
thanks, noble peer the cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
what art thou?
and how comest thou hither, where no man never comes but that sad dog that brings me food to make misfortune live?
i was a poor groom of thy stable, king, when thou wert king who, travelling towards york, with much ado at length have gotten leave to look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
o, how it yearn'd my heart when i beheld in london streets, that coronationday, when bolingbroke rode on roan barbary, that horse that thou so often hast bestrid, that horse that i so carefully have dress'd!
rode he on barbary?
tell me, gentle friend, how went he under him?
so proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
so proud that bolingbroke was on his back!
that jade hath eat bread from my royal hand this hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
would he not stumble?
would he not fall down, since pride must have a fall, and break the neck of that proud man that did usurp his back?
forgiveness, horse!
why do i rail on thee, since thou, created to be awed by man, wast born to bear?
i was not made a horse and yet i bear a burthen like an ass, spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing bolingbroke.
fellow, give place here is no longer stay.
if thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
what my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
my lord, will't please you to fall to?
taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
my lord, sir pierce of exton, who lately came from the king, commands the contrary.
the devil take henry of lancaster and thee!
patience is stale, and i am weary of it.
help, help, help!
how now!
what means death in this rude assault?
villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
go thou, and fill another room in hell.
that hand shall burn in neverquenching fire that staggers thus my person.
exton, thy fierce hand hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.
mount, mount, my soul!
thy seat is up on high whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
both have i spill'd o would the deed were good!
for now the devil, that told me i did well, says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
this dead king to the living king i'll bear take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
kind uncle york, the latest news we hear is that the rebels have consumed with fire our town of cicester in gloucestershire but whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
welcome, my lord what is the news?
first, to thy sacred state wish i all happiness.
the next news is, i have to london sent the heads of oxford, salisbury, blunt, the manner of their taking may appear at large discoursed in this paper here.
we thank thee, gentle percy, for thy pains and to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
my lord, i have from oxford sent to london the heads of brocas and sir bennet seely, two of the dangerous consorted traitors that sought at oxford thy dire overthrow.
thy pains, fitzwater, shall not be forgot right noble is thy merit, well i wot.
the grand conspirator, abbot of westminster, with clog of conscience and sour melancholy hath yielded up his body to the grave but here is carlisle living, to abide thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
carlisle, choose out some secret place, some reverend room, more than thou hast, and with it joy thy life so as thou livest in peace, for though mine enemy thou hast ever been, high sparks of honour in thee have i seen.
great king, within this coffin i present herein all breathless lies the mightiest of thy greatest enemies, richard of bordeaux, by me hither brought.
exton, i thank thee not for thou hast wrought a deed of slander with thy fatal hand upon my head and all this famous land.
from your own mouth, my lord, did i this deed.
they love not poison that do poison need, though i did wish him dead, i hate the murderer, love him murdered.
the guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, with cain go wander through shades of night, and never show thy head by day nor light.
lords, i protest, my soul is full of woe, come, mourn with me for that i do lament, i'll make a voyage to the holy land, march sadly after grace my mournings here in weeping after this untimely bier.
gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
no, for then we should be colliers.
i mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
i strike quickly, being moved.
but thou art not quickly moved to strike.
a dog of the house of montague moves me.
to move is to stir therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
i will take the wall of any man or maid of montague's.
that shows thee a weak slave for the weakest goes to the wall.
true and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, therefore i will push montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
the quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
'tis all one, when i have fought with the men, i will be cruel with the maids, and cut off their heads.
the heads of the maids?
ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads take it in what sense thou wilt.
they must take it in sense that feel it.
and 'tis known i am a pretty piece of flesh.
'tis well thou art not fish if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor john.
draw thy tool!
here comes two of the house of the montagues.
quarrel, i will back thee.
how!
turn thy back and run?
fear me not.
no, marry i fear thee!
let us take the law of our sides let them begin.
i will frown as i pass by, and let them take it as they list.
nay, as they dare.
i will bite my thumb at them which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
i do bite my thumb, sir.
do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
no, sir, i do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but i bite my thumb, sir.
do you quarrel, sir?
quarrel sir!
no, sir.
if you do, sir, i serve as good a man as you.
no better.
well, sir.
say '' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
yes, better, sir.
you lie.
draw, if you be men.
gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
part, fools!
put up your swords you know not what you do.
what, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
turn thee, benvolio, look upon thy death.
put up thy sword, or manage it to part these men with me.
what, drawn, and talk of peace!
i hate the word, as i hate hell, all montagues, have at thee, coward!
clubs, bills, and partisans!
strike!
beat them down!
down with the capulets!
down with the montagues!
what noise is this?
give me my long sword, ho!
a crutch, a crutch!
why call you for a sword?
my sword, i say!
old montague is come, and flourishes his blade in spite of me.
thou villain capulet,hold me not, let me go.
thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.
rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, profaners of this neighbourstained steel, will they not hear?
what, ho!
you men, you beasts, that quench the fire of your pernicious rage with purple fountains issuing from your veins, on pain of torture, from those bloody hands throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground, and hear the sentence of your moved prince.
three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, by thee, old capulet, and montague, have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets, and made verona's ancient citizens cast by their grave beseeming ornaments, to wield old partisans, in hands as old, canker'd with peace, to part your canker' if ever you disturb our streets again, your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
for this time, you capulet and, montague, come you this afternoon, to know our further pleasure in this case, to old freetown, our common judgmentplace.
once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
here were the servants of your adversary, and yours, in the instant came the fiery tybalt, with his sword prepared, which, as he breathed defiance to my ears, he swung about his head and cut the winds, who nothing hurt withal hiss' while we were interchanging thrusts and blows, came more and more and fought on part and part, till the prince came, who parted either part.
o, where is romeo?
saw you him today?
right glad i am he was not at this fray.
madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun peer'd forth the golden window of the east, a troubled mind drave me to walk abroad where, underneath the grove of sycamore that westward rooteth from the city's side, towards him i made, but he was ware of me i, measuring his affections by my own, that most are busied when they're most alone, pursued my humour not pursuing his, and gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
many a morning hath he there been seen, with tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs but all so soon as the allcheering sun should in the furthest east begin to draw the shady curtains from aurora's bed, away from the light steals home my heavy son, and private in his chamber pens himself, shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out black and portentous must this humour prove, unless good counsel may the cause remove.
my noble uncle, do you know the cause?
i neither know it nor can learn of him.
have you importuned him by any means?
but he, his own affections' counsellor, is to himselfi will not say how true but to himself so secret and so close, so far from sounding and discovery, as is the bud bit with an envious worm, ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
we would as willingly give cure as know.
see, so please you, step aside i'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
i would thou wert so happy by thy stay, to hear true shrift.
come, madam, let's away.
goodmorrow, cousin.
is the day so young?
but new struck nine.
ay me!
sad hours seem long.
was that my father that went hence so fast?
it was.
what sadness lengthens romeo's hours?
not having that, which, having, makes them short.
in love?
out of love?
out of her favour, where i am in love.
alas, that love, so gentle in his view, should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
alas, that love, whose view is muffled still, should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
where shall we dine?
o me!
what fray was here?
yet tell me not, for i have heard it all.
here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
why, then, o brawling love!
o loving hate!
o any thing, of nothing first create!
o heavy lightness!
serious vanity!
misshapen chaos of wellseeming forms!
feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
stillwaking sleep, that is not what it is!
this love feel i, that feel no love in this.
dost thou not laugh?
no, coz, i rather weep.
good heart, at what?
at thy good heart's oppression.
why, such is love's transgression.
griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest this love that thou hast shown doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' what is it else?
a madness most discreet, a choking gall and a preserving sweet.
farewell, my coz.
soft!
i will go along an if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
tut, i have lost myself i am not here this is not romeo, he's some other where.
tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
what, shall i groan and tell thee?
groan!
why, no.
but sadly tell me who.
ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
in sadness, cousin, i do love a woman.
i aim'd so near, when i supposed you loved.
a right good markman!
and she's fair i love.
a right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
well, she'll not be hit with cupid's arrow she hath dian's wit and, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd, from love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
she will not stay the siege of loving terms, nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes, nor ope her lap to saint o, she is rich in beauty, only poor, that when she dies with beauty dies her store.
then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
she hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, for beauty starved with her severity cuts beauty off from all posterity.
she is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, she hath forsworn to love, and in that vow do i live dead that live to tell it now.
be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
o, teach me how i should forget to think.
by giving liberty unto thine eyes examine other beauties.
'tis the way to call hers exquisite, these happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows being black put us in mind they hide the fair he that is strucken blind cannot forget show me a mistress that is passing fair, what doth her beauty serve, but as a note where i may read who pass'd that passing fair?
thou canst not teach me to forget.
i'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
but montague is bound as well as i, in penalty alike and 'tis not hard, i think, for men so old as we to keep the peace.
of honourable reckoning are you both and pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
but now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
but saying o' my child is yet a stranger in the world she hath not seen the change of fourteen years, let two more summers wither in their pride, ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
younger than she are happy mothers made.
and too soon marr'd are those so early made.
the earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she, but woo her, gentle paris, get her heart, my will to her consent is but a part an she agree, within her scope of choice lies my consent and fair according voice.
this night i hold an old accustom'd feast, whereto i have invited many a guest, such as i love and you, among the store, one more, most welcome, makes my number more.
at my poor house look to behold this night earth such comfort as do lusty young men feel when wellapparell'd april on the heel of limping winter treads, even such delight among fresh female buds shall you this night inherit at my house hear all, all see, which on more view, of many mine being one may stand in number, though in reckoning none, come, go with me.
go, sirrah, trudge about through fair verona find those persons out whose names are written there, and to them say, my house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
find them out whose names are written here!
it is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets but i am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ.
i must to the learned.
in good time.
tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning, one pain is lessen'd by another's anguish turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning one desperate grief cures with another' take thou some new infection to thy eye, and the rank poison of the old will die.
your plaintainleaf is excellent for that.
for what, i pray thee?
for your broken shin.
why, romeo, art thou mad?
not mad, but bound more than a madman is shut up in prison, kept without my food, whipp'd and tormented andgodden, good fellow.
god gi' godden.
i pray, sir, can you read?
ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
but, i pray, can you read any thing you see?
ay, if i know the letters and the language.
rest you merry!
stay, fellow i can read.
'signior martino and his wife and daughters county anselme and his beauteous sisters the lady widow of vitravio signior placentio and his lovely nieces mercutio and his brother valentine mine uncle capulet, his wife and daughters my fair niece rosaline livia signior valentio and his cousin tybalt, lucio and the lively helena.
' a fair whither should they come?
whither?
to supper to our house.
whose house?
my master's.
indeed, i should have ask'd you that before.
now i' my master is the great rich capulet and if you be not of the house of montagues, i pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
rest you merry!
at this same ancient feast of capulet's sups the fair rosaline whom thou so lovest, go thither and, with unattainted eye, compare her face with some that i shall show, and i will make thee think thy swan a crow.
when the devout religion of mine eye maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires and these, who often drown'd could never die, transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
one fairer than my love!
the allseeing sun ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, but in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd your lady's love against some other maid that i will show you shining at this feast, and she shall scant show well that now shows best.
i'll go along, no such sight to be shown, but to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
nurse, where's my daughter?
call her forth to me.
now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old, i bade her come.
what, lamb!
what, ladybird!
god forbid!
where's this girl?
what, juliet!
how now!
who calls?
your mother.
madam, i am here.
what is your will?
nurse, give leave awhile, nurse, come back again i have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
faith, i can tell her age unto an hour.
she's not fourteen.
i'll lay fourteen of my teeth, and yet, to my teeth be it spoken, i have but four she is not fourteen.
how long is it now to lammastide?
a fortnight and odd days.
even or odd, of all days in the year, come lammaseve at night shall she be fourteen.
susan and shegod rest all christian souls!
well, susan is with god but, as i said, on lammaseve at night shall she be fourteen that shall she, marry i remember it well.
'tis since the earthquake now eleven years and she was wean'd,i never shall forget it, of all the days of the year, for i had then laid wormwood to my dug, sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall nay,but, as i said, when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, to see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
shake quoth the dove 'twas no need, i trow, and since that time it is eleven years for then she could stand alone nay, by the rood, she could have run and waddled all about for even the day before, and then my husbandgod be with his soul!
a' was a merry man 'yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit wilt thou not, jule?
' and, by my holidame, the pretty wretch left crying and said 'ay.
' to see, now, how a jest shall come about!
i warrant, an i should live a thousand years, 'wilt thou not, jule?
' quoth he and, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'ay.
' enough of this i pray thee, hold thy peace.
yes, yet i cannot choose but laugh, to think it should leave crying and say 'ay.
' and yet, i warrant, it had upon its brow a bump as big as a young cockerel's stone a parlous knock 'yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age wilt thou not, jule?
' it stinted and said 'ay.
' and stint thou too, i pray thee, nurse, say i.
peace, i have done.
god mark thee to his grace!
thou wast the prettiest babe that e' an i might live to see thee married once, i have my wish.
marry, that 'marry' is the very theme i came to talk of.
tell me, daughter juliet, how stands your disposition to be married?
it is an honour that i dream not of.
an honour!
were not i thine only nurse, i would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
well, think of marriage now younger than you, here in verona, ladies of esteem, by my count, i was your mother much upon these years that you are now a maid.
the valiant paris seeks you for his love.
a man, young lady!
lady, such a man as all the worldwhy, he's a man of wax.
verona's summer hath not such a flower.
nay, he's a flower in faith, a very flower.
what say you?
can you love the gentleman?
this night you shall behold him at our feast read o'er the volume of young paris' face, and find delight writ there with beauty's pen examine every married lineament, and see how one another lends content and what obscured in this fair volume lies find written in the margent of his eyes.
this precious book of love, this unbound lover, to beautify him, the fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride that book in many's eyes doth share the glory, that in gold clasps locks in the golden story so shall you share all that he doth possess, by having him, making yourself no less.
no less!
nay, bigger women grow by men.
speak briefly, can you like of paris' love?
i'll look to like, but no more deep will i endart mine eye than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity.
i must hence to wait i beseech you, follow straight.
we follow thee.
juliet, the county stays.
go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
what, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
or shall we on without a apology?
we'll have no cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf, bearing a tartar's painted bow of lath, scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper nor no withoutbook prologue, faintly spoke after the prompter, but let them measure us by what they will we'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
i am not for this ambling being but heavy, i will bear the light.
nay, gentle romeo, we must have you dance.
not i, you have dancing shoes i have a soul of lead so stakes me to the ground i cannot move.
you are a lover borrow cupid's wings, and soar with them above a common bound.
i am too sore enpierced with his shaft to soar with his light feathers, and so bound, under love's heavy burden do i sink.
and, to sink in it, should you burden love too great oppression for a tender thing.
is love a tender thing?
it is too rough, too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
if love be rough with you, be rough with love prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
a visor for a visor!
what care i what curious eye doth quote deformities?
here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
come, knock and enter and no sooner in, but every man betake him to his legs.
let wantons light of heart tickle the senseless rushes with their heels, for i am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase i'll be a candleholder, and look on.
the game was ne'er so fair, and i am done.
tut, dun's the mouse, the constable' if thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire of this sirreverence love, wherein thou stick'st up to the ears.
come, we burn daylight, ho!
nay, that's not so.
i mean, sir, in delay we waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
take our good meaning, for our judgment sits five times in that ere once in our five wits.
and we mean well in going to this mask but 'tis no wit to go.
why, may one ask?
i dream'd a dream tonight.
and so did i.
well, what was yours?
that dreamers often lie.
in bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
o, then, i see queen mab hath been with you.
she is the fairies' midwife, and she comes in shape no bigger than an agatestone on the forefinger of an alderman, drawn with a team of little atomies athwart men's noses as they lie asleep her wagonspokes made of long spiders' legs, the cover of the wings of grasshoppers, the traces of the smallest spider's web, the collars of the moonshine's watery beams, her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film, her wagoner a small greycoated gnat, not so big as a round little worm prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid her chariot is an empty hazelnut made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
and in this state she gallops night by night through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love o'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight, o'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees, o'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream, which oft the angry mab with blisters plagues, sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose, and then dreams he of smelling out a suit and sometime comes she with a tithepig's tail tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep, then dreams, sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck, and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, of breaches, ambuscadoes, spanish blades, of healths fivefathom deep and then anon drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, and being thus frighted swears a prayer or two and sleeps again.
this is that very mab that plats the manes of horses in the night, and bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, which once untangled, this is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, that presses them and learns them first to bear, this is she peace, peace, mercutio, peace!
thou talk'st of nothing.
true, i talk of dreams, which are the children of an idle brain, begot of nothing but vain fantasy, which is as thin of substance as the air and more inconstant than the wind, who wooes even now the frozen bosom of the north, and, being anger'd, puffs away from thence, turning his face to the dewdropping south.
this wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves supper is done, and we shall come too late.
i fear, for my mind misgives some consequence yet hanging in the stars shall bitterly begin his fearful date with this night's revels and expire the term of a despised life closed in my breast by some vile forfeit of untimely death.
but he, that hath the steerage of my course, direct my sail!
on, lusty gentlemen.
strike, drum.
where's potpan, that he helps not to take away?
he shift a trencher?
he scrape a trencher!
when good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
away with the jointstools, remove the courtcupboard, look to the plate.
good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as thou lovest me, let the porter let in susan grindstone and nell.
antony, and potpan!
ay, boy, ready.
you are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
we cannot be here and there too.
cheerly, boys be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
welcome, gentlemen!
ladies that have their toes unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
ah ha, my mistresses!
which of you all will now deny to dance?
she that makes dainty, she, i'll swear, hath corns am i come near ye now?
welcome, gentlemen!
i have seen the day that i have worn a visor and could tell a whispering tale in a fair lady's ear, 'tis gone, 'tis gone, ' you are welcome, gentlemen!
come, musicians, play.
a hall, a hall!
give room!
and foot it, girls.
more light, you knaves and turn the tables up, and quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
ah, sirrah, this unlook'dfor sport comes well.
nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin capulet how long is't now since last yourself and i were in a mask?
by'r lady, thirty years.
what, man!
'tis not so much, ' 'tis since the nuptials of lucentio, come pentecost as quickly as it will, some five and twenty years and then we mask'd.
'tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir his son is thirty.
will you tell me that?
his son was but a ward two years ago.
i know not, sir.
o, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night like a rich jewel in an ethiope's ear beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows, as yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
the measure done, i'll watch her place of stand, and, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
did my heart love till now?
forswear it, sight!
for i ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
this, by his voice, should be a montague.
fetch me my rapier, boy.
what dares the slave come hither, cover'd with an antic face, to fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
now, by the stock and honour of my kin, to strike him dead, i hold it not a sin.
why, how now, kinsman!
wherefore storm you so?
uncle, this is a montague, our foe, a villain that is hither come in spite, to scorn at our solemnity this night.
young romeo is it?
'tis he, that villain romeo.
content thee, gentle coz, let him alone he bears him like a portly gentleman and, to say truth, verona brags of him to be a virtuous and wellgovern' i would not for the wealth of all the town therefore be patient, it is my will, the which if thou respect, show a fair presence and put off these frowns, and illbeseeming semblance for a feast.
it fits, i'll not endure him.
what, goodman boy!
i say, go to am i the master here, or you?
go to.
you'll not endure him!
god shall mend my soul!
you'll make a mutiny among my guests!
you will set cockahoop!
you'll be the man!
why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
go to, go to is't so, indeed?
this trick may chance to scathe you, you must contrary me!
marry, 'tis time.
well said, my hearts!
you are a princox be quiet, ormore light, more light!
for shame!
i'll make you quiet.
what, cheerly, my hearts!
patience perforce with wilful choler meeting makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
but this intrusion shall now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.
good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, which mannerly devotion shows in this for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
o, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do they pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
then move not, while my prayer's effect i take.
thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
then have my lips the sin that they have took.
sin from thy lips?
o trespass sweetly urged!
give me my sin again.
you kiss by the book.
madam, your mother craves a word with you.
what is her mother?
marry, bachelor, her mother is the lady of the house, and a good lady, and a wise and virtuous i nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal i tell you, he that can lay hold of her shall have the chinks.
is she a capulet?
o dear account!
my life is my foe's debt.
away, begone the sport is at the best.
ay, so i fear the more is my unrest.
nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone we have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
is it e'en so?
why, then, i thank you all i thank you, honest gentlemen good night.
more torches here!
come on then, let's to bed.
ah, sirrah, by my fay, i'll to my rest.
come hither, nurse.
what is yond gentleman?
the son and heir of old tiberio.
what's he that now is going out of door?
marry, that, i think, be young petrucio.
what's he that follows there, that would not dance?
i know not.
if he be married.
my grave is like to be my wedding bed.
his name is romeo, and a montague the only son of your great enemy.
my only love sprung from my only hate!
too early seen unknown, and known too late!
prodigious birth of love it is to me, that i must love a loathed enemy.
what's this?
what's this?
a rhyme i learn'd even now of one i danced withal.
anon, anon!
come, let's away the strangers all are gone.
now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, and young affection gapes to be his heir that fair for which love groan'd for and would die, with tender juliet match'd, is now not fair.
now romeo is beloved and loves again, alike betwitched by the charm of looks, but to his foe supposed he must complain, and she steal love' being held a foe, he may not have access to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear and she as much in love, her means much less to meet her new but passion lends them power, time means, to meet tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
can i go forward when my heart is here?
turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
romeo!
my cousin romeo!
he is wise and, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
he ran this way, and leap' call, good mercutio.
nay, i'll conjure too.
romeo!
humours!
madman!
passion!
lover!
speak but one rhyme, and i am satisfied cry but 'ay me!
' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove' speak to my gossip venus one fair word, one nickname for her purblind son and heir, young adam cupid, he that shot so trim, when king cophetua loved the beggarmaid!
he heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not the ape is dead, and i must conjure him.
i conjure thee by rosaline's bright eyes, by her high forehead and her scarlet lip, by her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh and the demesnes that there adjacent lie, that in thy likeness thou appear to us!
and if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
'twould anger him to raise a spirit in his mistress' circle of some strange nature, letting it there stand till she had laid it and conjured it down my invocation is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name i conjure only but to raise up him.
come, he hath hid himself among these trees, blind is his love and best befits the dark.
if love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
now will he sit under a medlar tree, and wish his mistress were that kind of fruit as maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
romeo, that she were, o, that she were an open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
romeo, i'll to my trucklebed this field come, shall we go?
go, then for 'tis in vain to seek him here that means not to be found.
he jests at scars that never felt a wound.
but, soft!
what light through yonder window breaks?
it is the east, and juliet is the sun.
arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, who is already sick and pale with grief, be not her maid, since she is envious her vestal livery is but sick and green and none but fools do wear it cast it off.
it is my lady, o, it is my love!
o, that she knew she were!
what of that?
her eye discourses i will answer it.
i am too bold, ' two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, having some business, do entreat her eyes to twinkle in their spheres till they return.
what if her eyes were there, they in her head?
the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars, as daylight doth a lamp her eyes in heaven would through the airy region stream so bright that birds would sing and think it were not night.
see, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
o, that i were a glove upon that hand, that i might touch that cheek!
ay me!
o, speak again, bright angel!
for thou art as glorious to this night, being o'er my head as is a winged messenger of heaven unto the whiteupturned wondering eyes of mortals that fall back to gaze on him when he bestrides the lazypacing clouds and sails upon the bosom of the air.
o romeo, romeo!
wherefore art thou romeo?
deny thy father and refuse thy name or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, and i'll no longer be a capulet.
'tis but thy name that is my enemy thou art thyself, though not a montague.
what's montague?
it is nor hand, nor foot, nor arm, nor face, nor any other part belonging to a man.
o, be some other name!
what's in a name?
that which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet so romeo would, were he not romeo call'd, retain that dear perfection which he owes without that title.
romeo, doff thy name, and for that name which is no part of thee take all myself.
call me but love, and i'll be new baptized henceforth i never will be romeo.
what man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night so stumblest on my counsel?
by a name my name, dear saint, is hateful to myself, because it is an enemy to thee had i it written, i would tear the word.
my ears have not yet drunk a hundred words of that tongue's utterance, art thou not romeo and a montague?
neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
how camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
the orchard walls are high and hard to climb, and the place death, considering who thou art, if any of my kinsmen find thee here.
with love's light wings did i o'erperch these walls for stony limits cannot hold love out, and what love can do that dares love attempt therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
if they do see thee, they will murder thee.
alack, there lies more peril in thine eye look thou but sweet, and i am proof against their enmity.
i would not for the world they saw thee here.
i have night's cloak to hide me from their sight and but thou love me, my life were better ended by their hate, than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
by whose direction found'st thou out this place?
by love, who first did prompt me to inquire he lent me counsel and i lent him eyes.
i am no pilot yet, wert thou as far as that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea, i would adventure for such merchandise.
thou know'st the mask of night is on my face, else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak tonight fain would i dwell on form, fain, fain deny but farewell compliment!
dost thou love me?
i know thou wilt say 'ay,' yet if thou swear'st, thou mayst prove false at lovers' perjuries then say, jove laughs.
o gentle romeo, if thou dost love, or if thou think'st i am too quickly won, i'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay, so thou wilt woo but else, not for the world.
in truth, fair montague, i am too fond, and therefore thou mayst think my ' but trust me, gentleman, i'll prove more true than those that have more cunning to be strange.
i should have been more strange, i must confess, but that thou overheard'st, ere i was ware, my true love' therefore pardon me, and not impute this yielding to light love, which the dark night hath so discovered.
lady, by yonder blessed moon i swear that tips with silver all these fruittree tops o, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon, that monthly changes in her circled orb, lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
what shall i swear by?
do not swear at all or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, which is the god of my idolatry, and i'll believe thee.
if my heart's dear love well, although i joy in thee, i have no joy of this contract to it is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden too like the lightning, which doth cease to be ere one can say 'it lightens.
' sweet, good night!
this bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
good night, good night!
as sweet repose and rest come to thy heart as that within my breast!
o, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
what satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
the exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
and yet i would it were to give again.
wouldst thou withdraw it?
for what purpose, love?
but to be frank, and give it thee again.
my bounty is as boundless as the sea, my love as deep the more i give to thee, the more i have, for both are infinite.
i hear some noise within dear love, adieu!
anon, good nurse!
sweet montague, be true.
stay but a little, i will come again.
o blessed, blessed night!
i am afeard.
being in night, all this is but a dream, too flatteringsweet to be substantial.
three words, dear romeo, and good night indeed.
if that thy bent of love be honourable, thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow, by one that i'll procure to come to thee, where and what time thou wilt perform the rite and all my fortunes at thy foot i'll lay and follow thee my lord throughout the world.
i come, anon.
but if thou mean'st not well, i do beseech thee by and by, to cease thy suit, tomorrow will i send.
so thrive my soul a thousand times good night!
a thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
love goes toward love, as schoolboys from their books, but love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
hist!
romeo, hist!
o, for a falconer's voice, to lure this tasselgentle back again!
bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud else would i tear the cave where echo lies, and make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine, with repetition of my romeo's name.
how silversweet sound lovers' tongues by night, like softest music to attending ears!
romeo!
my dear?
at what o'clock tomorrow shall i send to thee?
at the hour of nine.
'tis twenty years till then.
i have forgot why i did call thee back.
let me stand here till thou remember it.
i shall forget, to have thee still stand there, remembering how i love thy company.
and i'll still stay, to have thee still forget, forgetting any other home but this.
'tis almost morning and yet no further than a wanton's bird who lets it hop a little from her hand, like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, and with a silk thread plucks it back again, so lovingjealous of his liberty.
i would i were thy bird.
sweet, yet i should kill thee with much cherishing.
good night, good night!
parting is such sweet sorrow, that i shall say good night till it be morrow.
sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
would i were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
hence will i to my ghostly father's cell, his help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
the greyeyed morn smiles on the frowning night, chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, and flecked darkness like a drunkard reels from forth day's path and titan' now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, the day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, i must upfill this osier cage of ours with baleful weeds and preciousjuiced flowers.
the earth that's nature's mother is her tomb what is her burying grave that is her womb, and from her womb children of divers kind we sucking on her natural bosom find, many for many virtues excellent, none but for some and yet all different.
o, mickle is the powerful grace that lies in herbs, plants, stones, for nought so vile that on the earth doth live but to the earth some special good doth give, nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use revolts from true birth, virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied and vice sometimes by action dignified.
within the infant rind of this small flower for this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
two such opposed kings encamp them still in man as well as herbs, grace and rude will and where the worser is predominant, full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
good morrow, father.
benedicite!
what early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
young son, it argues a distemper'd head care keeps his watch in every old man's eye, and where care lodges, sleep will never lie but where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain doth couch his limbs, therefore thy earliness doth me assure thou art uproused by some distemperature or if not so, then here i hit it right, our romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
that last is true the sweeter rest was mine.
god pardon sin!
wast thou with rosaline?
with rosaline, my ghostly father?
no i have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
that' but where hast thou been, then?
i'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
i have been feasting with mine enemy, where on a sudden one hath wounded me, that' both our remedies i bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo, my intercession likewise steads my foe.
be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
then plainly know my heart's dear love is set as mine on hers, so hers is set on mine and all combined, save what thou must combine when and where and how we met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow, i'll tell thee as we pass but this i pray, that thou consent to marry us today.
holy saint francis, what a change is here!
is rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, so soon forsaken?
young men's love then lies not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
jesu maria, what a deal of brine hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for rosaline!
how much salt water thrown away in waste, to season love, that of it doth not taste!
the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit of an old tear that is not wash' if e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, and art thou changed?
pronounce this sentence then, women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
thou chid'st me oft for loving rosaline.
for doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
and bad'st me bury love.
not in a grave, to lay one in, another out to have.
i pray thee, chide not she whom i love now doth grace for grace and love for love allow the other did not so.
o, she knew well thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
but come, young waverer, come, go with me, in one respect i'll thy assistant be for this alliance may so happy prove, to turn your households' rancour to pure love.
o, let us hence i stand on sudden haste.
wisely and slow they stumble that run fast.
where the devil should this romeo be?
came he not home tonight?
not to his father's i spoke with his man.
ah, that same pale hardhearted wench, that rosaline.
torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
tybalt, the kinsman of old capulet, hath sent a letter to his father's house.
a challenge, on my life.
romeo will answer it.
any man that can write may answer a letter.
nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.
alas poor romeo!
he is already dead stabbed with a white wench's black eye shot through the ear with a lovesong the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bowboy's butt and is he a man to encounter tybalt?
why, what is tybalt?
more than prince of cats, i can tell you.
o, he is the courageous captain of compliments.
he fights as you sing pricksong, keeps time, distance, and proportion rests me his minim rest, one, two, and the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist a gentleman of the very first house, ah, the immortal passado!
the punto reverso!
the hai!
the what?
the pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes these new tuners of accents!
'by jesu, a very good blade!
a very tall man!
a very good whore!
' why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashionmongers, these perdonami's, who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot at ease on the old bench?
o, their bones, their bones!
here comes romeo, here comes romeo.
without his roe, flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified!
now is he for the numbers laura to his lady was but a kitchenwench marry, she had a better love to berhyme her dido a dowdy cleopatra a gipsy helen and hero hildings and harlots thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose.
signior romeo, bon jour!
there's a french salutation to your french slop.
you gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
good morrow to you both.
what counterfeit did i give you?
the ship, sir, the slip can you not conceive?
pardon, good mercutio, my business was great and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
that's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
meaning, to court'sy.
thou hast most kindly hit it.
a most courteous exposition.
nay, i am the very pink of courtesy.
pink for flower.
right.
why, then is my pump well flowered.
follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
o singlesoled jest, solely singular for the singleness.
come between us, good benvolio my wits faint.
switch and spurs, switch and spurs or i'll cry a match.
nay, if thy wits run the wildgoose chase, i have done, for thou hast more of the wildgoose in one of thy wits than, i am sure, was i with you there for the goose?
thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast not there for the goose.
i will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
nay, good goose, bite not.
thy wit is a very bitter sweeting it is a most sharp sauce.
and is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
o here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
i stretch it out for that word 'broad' which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou romeo now art thou what thou art, for this drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
stop there, stop there.
thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
o, thou art deceived for i was come to the whole depth of my tale and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
here's goodly gear!
a sail, a sail!
two, two a shirt and a smock.
peter!
anon!
my fan, peter.
good peter, to hide her face for her fan's the fairer face.
god ye good morrow, gentlemen.
god ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
is it good den?
'tis no less, i tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
out upon you!
what a man are you!
one, gentlewoman, that god hath made for himself to mar.
by my troth, it is well said 'for himself to mar,' quoth a'?
gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i may find the young romeo?
i can tell you but young romeo will be older when i am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
you say well.
yea, is the worst well?
very well took, i' faith wisely, wisely.
if you be he, sir, i desire some confidence with you.
she will indite him to some supper.
a bawd, a bawd, a bawd!
so ho!
what hast thou found?
no hare, sir unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
an old hare hoar, and an old hare hoar, is very good meat in lent but a hare that is hoar is too much for a score, when it hoars ere it be spent.
romeo, will you come to your father's?
we'll to dinner, thither.
i will follow you.
farewell, ancient lady farewell, 'lady, lady, lady.
' marry, farewell!
i pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
a gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
an a' speak any thing against me, i'll take him down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks and if i cannot, i'll find those that shall.
scurvy knave!
i am none of his flirtgills i am none of his skainsmates.
and thou must stand by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
i saw no man use you a pleasure if i had, my weapon should quickly have been out, i dare draw as soon as another man, if i see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.
now, afore god, i am so vexed, that every part about me quivers.
scurvy knave!
pray you, sir, and as i told you, my young lady bade me inquire you out what she bade me say, but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, for the gentlewoman is young and, therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.
i protest unto thee good heart, and, i' faith, lord, lord, she will be a joyful woman.
what wilt thou tell her, nurse?
thou dost not mark me.
i will tell her, sir, that you do protest which, as i take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon and there she shall at friar laurence' cell be shrived and married.
here is for thy pains.
no truly sir not a penny.
go to i say you shall.
this afternoon, sir?
well, she shall be there.
and stay, good nurse, within this hour my man shall be with thee and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair which to the high topgallant of my joy must be my convoy in the secret night.
farewell be trusty, and i' farewell commend me to thy mistress.
now god in heaven bless thee!
hark you, sir.
what say'st thou, my dear nurse?
is your man secret?
did you ne'er hear say, two may keep counsel, putting one away?
i warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
well, sir my mistress is the sweetest ladylord, lord!
when 'o, there is a nobleman in town, one paris, that would fain lay knife aboard but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him.
i anger her sometimes and tell her that paris is the properer man but, i'll warrant you, when i say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world.
doth not rosemary and romeo begin both with a letter?
ay, nurse what of that?
both with an r.
mocker!
that's the dog's name r is for theno i know it begins with some other and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
commend me to thy lady.
ay, a thousand times.
peter!
anon!
peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse in half an hour she promised to return.
that's not so.
o, she is lame!
love's heralds should be thoughts, which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams, therefore do nimblepinion'd doves draw love, and therefore hath the windswift cupid wings.
now is the sun upon the highmost hill of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve is three long hours, yet she is not come.
had she affections and warm youthful blood, she would be as swift in motion as a ball my words would bandy her to my sweet love, but old folks, many feign as they were dead unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
o god, she comes!
o honey nurse, what news?
hast thou met with him?
send thy man away.
peter, stay at the gate.
now, good sweet nurse,o lord, why look'st thou sad?
though news be sad, yet tell them merrily if good, thou shamest the music of sweet news by playing it to me with so sour a face.
i am aweary, fie, how my bones ache!
what a jaunt have i had!
i would thou hadst my bones, nay, come, i pray thee, speak good, good nurse, speak.
jesu, what haste?
can you not stay awhile?
do you not see that i am out of breath?
how art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath?
the excuse that thou dost make in this delay is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
is thy news good, or bad?
answer to that say either, and i' let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
well, you have made a simple choice you know not romeo!
no, not he though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's and for a hand, and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are he is not the flower of courtesy, but, i'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb.
go thy ways, wench serve god.
what, have you dined at home?
no, but all this did i know before.
what says he of our marriage?
what of that?
lord, how my head aches!
what a head have i!
it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
my back o' t' other side,o, my back, my back!
beshrew your heart for sending me about, to catch my death with jaunting up and down!
i' faith, i am sorry that thou art not well.
sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, i warrant, a virtuous,where is your mother?
where is my mother!
why, she is within where should she be?
how oddly thou repliest!
'your love says, like an honest gentleman, where is your mother?
' o god's lady dear!
are you so hot?
marry, come up, i trow is this the poultice for my aching bones?
henceforward do your messages yourself.
here's such a coil!
come, what says romeo?
have you got leave to go to shrift today?
i have.
then hie you hence to friar laurence' cell now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks, they'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
hie you to church i must another way, to fetch a ladder, by the which your love must climb a bird' i am the drudge and toil in your delight, but you shall bear the burden soon at night.
go i' hie you to the cell.
hie to high fortune!
honest nurse, farewell.
so smile the heavens upon this holy act, that after hours with sorrow chide us not!
amen, amen!
but come what sorrow can, it cannot countervail the exchange of joy do thou but close our hands with holy words, then lovedevouring death do what he dare it is enough i may but call her mine.
these violent delights have violent ends and in their triumph die, like fire and powder, the sweetest honey is loathsome in his own deliciousness therefore love moderately long love doth so too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
o, so light a foot will ne' a lover may bestride the gossamer that idles in the wanton summer air, and yet not fall so light is vanity.
good even to my ghostly confessor.
romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
as much to him, else is his thanks too much.
ah, juliet, if the measure of thy joy be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more to blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath this neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue unfold the imagined happiness that both receive in either by this dear encounter.
conceit, more rich in matter than in words, brags of his substance, they are but beggars that can count their worth but my true love is grown to such excess i cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
come, come with me, and we will make short work for, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone till holy church incorporate two in one.
i pray thee, good mercutio, let' the day is hot, the capulets abroad, and, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl for now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
thou art like one of those fellows that when he enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword upon the table and says 'god send me no need of thee!
' and by the operation of the second cup draws it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
am i like such a fellow?
come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
and what to?
nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other.
thou!
why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more, or a hair less, in his beard, thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before easter?
with another, for tying his new shoes with old riband?
and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the feesimple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
the feesimple!
o simple!
by my head, here come the capulets.
by my heel, i care not.
follow me close, for i will speak to them.
gentlemen, a word with one of you.
and but one word with one of us?
couple it with something make it a word and a blow.
you shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.
could you not take some occasion without giving?
mercutio, thou consort'st with romeo, consort!
what, dost thou make us minstrels?
an thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but here's my fiddlestick here's that shall make you dance.
'zounds, consort!
either withdraw unto some private place, and reason coldly of your grievances, or else depart here all eyes gaze on us.
men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze i will not budge for no man's pleasure, i.
well, peace be with you, here comes my man.
but i'll be hanged, sir, marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower your worship in that sense may call him 'man.
' romeo, the hate i bear thee can afford no better term than this,thou art a villain.
tybalt, the reason that i have to love thee doth much excuse the appertaining rage villain am i none therefore farewell i see thou know'st me not.
boy, this shall not excuse the injuries that thou hast done me therefore turn and draw.
i do protest, i never injured thee, but love thee better than thou canst devise, and so, good capulet,which name i tender as dearly as my own,be satisfied.
o calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
alla stoccata carries it away.
tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
what wouldst thou have with me?
good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives that i mean to make bold withal, and as you shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the eight.
will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher by the ears?
make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
i am for you.
gentle mercutio, put thy rapier up.
come, sir, your passado.
draw, benvolio beat down their weapons.
gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
tybalt, mercutio, the prince expressly hath hold, tybalt!
good mercutio!
i am hurt.
a plague o' both your houses!
i am sped.
is he gone, and hath nothing?
what, art thou hurt?
ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch marry, 'tis enough.
where is my page?
go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
courage, man the hurt cannot be much.
no, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a churchdoor but 'tis enough,' ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man.
i am peppered, i warrant, for this world.
a plague o' both your houses!
'zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death!
a braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic!
why the devil came you between us?
i was hurt under your arm.
i thought all for the best.
help me into some house, benvolio, or i shall faint.
a plague o' both your houses!
they have made worms' i have it, your houses!
this gentleman, the prince's near ally, my very friend, hath got his mortal hurt in my behalf my reputation stain'd with tybalt's slander,tybalt, that an hour hath been my kinsman!
o sweet juliet, thy beauty hath made me effeminate and in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
o romeo, romeo, brave mercutio's dead!
that gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds, which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
this day's black fate on more days doth depend this but begins the woe, others must end.
here comes the furious tybalt back again.
alive, in triumph!
and mercutio slain!
away to heaven, respective lenity, and fireeyed fury be my conduct now!
now, tybalt, take the villain back again, that late thou gavest me for mercutio's soul is but a little way above our heads, either thou, or i, or both, must go with him.
thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here, shalt with him hence.
this shall determine that.
romeo, away, be gone!
the citizens are up, and tybalt slain.
the prince will doom thee death, hence, be gone, away!
o, i am fortune's fool!
why dost thou stay?
which way ran he that kill'd mercutio?
tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
there lies that tybalt.
up, sir, go with me i charge thee in the princes name, obey.
where are the vile beginners of this fray?
o noble prince, i can discover all there lies the man, slain by young romeo, that slew thy kinsman, brave mercutio.
tybalt, my cousin!
o my brother's child!
o prince!
o cousin!
husband!
o, the blood is spilt o my dear kinsman!
prince, as thou art true, for blood of ours, shed blood of montague.
o cousin, cousin!
benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
tybalt, here slain, whom romeo's hand did slay romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink how nice the quarrel was, and urged withal all this uttered with gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd, could not take truce with the unruly spleen of tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts with piercing steel at bold mercutio's breast, who all as hot, turns deadly point to point, and, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats cold death aside, and with the other sends it back to tybalt, whose dexterity, romeo he cries aloud, 'hold, friends!
friends, part!
' and, swifter than his tongue, his agile arm beats down their fatal points, and 'twixt them rushes underneath whose arm an envious thrust from tybalt hit the life of stout mercutio, and then tybalt fled but by and by comes back to romeo, who had but newly entertain'd revenge, and to 't they go like lightning, for, ere i could draw to part them, was stout tybalt slain.
and, as he fell, did romeo turn and fly.
this is the truth, or let benvolio die.
he is a kinsman to the montague affection makes him false some twenty of them fought in this black strife, and all those twenty could but kill one life.
i beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give romeo slew tybalt, romeo must not live.
romeo slew him, he slew mercutio who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
not romeo, prince, he was mercutio's friend his fault concludes but what the law should end, the life of tybalt.
and for that offence i have an interest in your hate's proceeding, my blood for your rude brawls doth lie ableeding but i'll amerce you with so strong a fine i will be deaf to pleading and excuses let romeo hence in haste, else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
gallop apace, you fieryfooted steeds, towards phoebus' such a wagoner as phaethon would whip you to the west, and bring in cloudy night immediately.
spread thy close curtain, loveperforming night, that runaway's eyes may wink and romeo leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
lovers can see to do their amorous rites by their own beauties or, if love be blind, it best agrees with night.
come, civil night, thou sobersuited matron, all in black, and learn me how to lose a winning match, play' hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks, with thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold, think true love acted simple modesty.
come, night come, romeo come, thou day in night for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
come, gentle night, come, loving, blackbrow'd night, give me my romeo and, when he shall die, take him and cut him out in little stars, and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night and pay no worship to the garish sun.
o, i have bought the mansion of a love, but not possess'd it, and, though i am sold, not yet enjoy' so tedious is this day as is the night before some festival to an impatient child that hath new robes and may not wear them.
o, here comes my nurse, and she brings news and every tongue that speaks but romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
now, nurse, what news?
what hast thou there?
the cords that romeo bid thee fetch?
ay, ay, the cords.
ay me!
what news?
why dost thou wring thy hands?
ah, welladay!
he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
we are undone, lady, we are undone!
alack the day!
he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
can heaven be so envious?
romeo can, o romeo, romeo!
who ever would have thought it?
romeo!
what devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
this torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
hath romeo slain himself?
say thou but 'i,' and that bare vowel 'i' shall poison more than the death i am not i, if there be such an i or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'i.
' if he be slain, say 'i' or if not, brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
i saw the wound, i saw it with mine eyes, god save the mark!
a piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood, all in goreblood i swounded at the sight.
o, break, my heart!
poor bankrupt, break at once!
to prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
vile earth, to earth resign end motion here and thou and romeo press one heavy bier!
o tybalt, tybalt, the best friend i had!
o courteous tybalt!
honest gentleman!
that ever i should live to see thee dead!
what storm is this that blows so contrary?
is romeo slaughter'd, and is tybalt dead?
my dearloved cousin, and my dearer lord?
then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
for who is living, if those two are gone?
tybalt is gone, and romeo banished romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
o god!
did romeo's hand shed tybalt's blood?
it did, it did alas the day, it did!
o serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
beautiful tyrant!
fiend angelical!
dovefeather'd raven!
wolvishravening lamb!
despised substance of divinest show!
just opposite to what thou justly seem'st, a damned saint, an honourable villain!
o nature, what hadst thou to do in hell, when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend in moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
was ever book containing such vile matter so fairly bound?
o that deceit should dwell in such a gorgeous palace!
there's no trust, no faith, no honesty in men all perjured, all forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
ah, where's my man?
these griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
shame come to romeo!
blister'd be thy tongue for such a wish!
upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit for 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd sole monarch of the universal earth.
o, what a beast was i to chide at him!
will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
shall i speak ill of him that is my husband?
ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, when i, thy threehours wife, have mangled it?
but, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
that villain cousin would have kill' back, foolish tears, back to your native spring your tributary drops belong to woe, which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
my husband lives, that tybalt would have slain and tybalt's dead, all this is comfort wherefore weep i then?
some word there was, worser than tybalt's death, that murder' i would forget it fain but, o, it presses to my memory, like damned guilty deeds to sinners' 'tybalt is dead, and romeobanished' that 'banished,' that one word 'banished,' hath slain ten thousand tybalts.
tybalt's death was woe enough, or, if sour woe delights in fellowship and needly will be rank'd with other griefs, why follow'd not, when she said 'tybalt's dead,' thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both, which modern lamentations might have moved?
but with a rearward following tybalt's death, 'romeo is banished,' to speak that word, is father, mother, tybalt, romeo, juliet, all slain, all dead.
'romeo is banished!
' there is no end, no limit, measure, bound, in that word's death no words can that woe sound.
where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
weeping and wailing over tybalt' will you go to them?
i will bring you thither.
mine shall be spent, when theirs are dry, for romeo's banishment.
poor ropes, you are beguiled, both you and i he made you for a highway to my bed but i, a maid, die maidenwidowed.
come, cords, come, nurse i'll to my weddingbed and death, not romeo, take my maidenhead!
i'll find romeo i wot well where he is.
hark ye, i'll to him he is hid at laurence' cell.
o, find him!
give this ring to my true knight, and bid him come to take his last farewell.
romeo, come forth come forth, affliction is enamour'd of thy parts, and thou art wedded to calamity.
father, what news?
what is the prince's doom?
what sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand, that i yet know not?
too familiar i bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
what less than doomsday is the prince's doom?
a gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips, not body's death, but body's banishment.
ha, banishment!
be merciful, say 'death' for exile hath more terror in his look, do not say 'banishment.
' be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
there is no world without verona walls, but purgatory, torture, hell itself.
hencebanished is banish'd from the world, and world' then banished, is death misterm' calling death banishment, thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe, and smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
o deadly sin!
o rude unthankfulness!
thy fault our law calls death but the kind prince, taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law, and turn' this is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
'tis torture, heaven is here, where juliet lives and every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy thing, live here in heaven and may look on her more validity, more honourable state, more courtship lives in carrion they my seize on the white wonder of dear juliet's hand and steal immortal blessing from her lips, who even in pure and vestal modesty, still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin but romeo may not flies may do this, they are free men, but i am banished.
and say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharpground knife, no sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean, but 'banished' to kill me?
'banished'?
o friar, the damned use that word in hell how hast thou the heart, being a divine, a ghostly confessor, a sinabsolver, and my friend profess'd, to mangle me with that word 'banished'?
thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.
o, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
i' adversity's sweet milk, philosophy, to comfort thee, though thou art banished.
yet 'banished'?
hang up philosophy!
unless philosophy can make a juliet, displant a town, reverse a prince's doom, it helps not, talk no more.
o, then i see that madmen have no ears.
how should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
wert thou as young as i, juliet thy love, an hour but married, tybalt murdered, doting like me and like me banished, then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair, and fall upon the ground, as i do now, taking the measure of an unmade grave.
arise one knocks good romeo, hide thyself.
not i unless the breath of heartsick groans, mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.
hark, how they knock!
who's there?
romeo, arise thou wilt be taken.
stay awhile!
stand up run to my study.
by and by!
god's will, what simpleness is this!
i come, i come!
who knocks so hard?
whence come you?
what's your will?
welcome, then.
o holy friar, o, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady's lord, where's romeo?
there on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
o, he is even in my mistress' case, just in her case!
o woful sympathy!
piteous predicament!
even so lies she, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
stand up, stand up stand, for juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand why should you fall into so deep an o?
nurse!
ah sir!
ah sir!
well, death's the end of all.
spakest thou of juliet?
how is it with her?
doth she not think me an old murderer, now i have stain'd the childhood of our joy with blood removed but little from her own?
where is she?
and how doth she?
and what says my conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
o, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps and now falls on her bed and then starts up, and tybalt calls and then on romeo cries, and then down falls again.
as if that name, shot from the deadly level of a gun, did murder her as that name's cursed hand murder'd her kinsman.
o, tell me, friar, tell me, in what vile part of this anatomy doth my name lodge?
tell me, that i may sack the hateful mansion.
art thou a man?
thy tears are womanish thy wild acts denote unseemly woman in a seeming man!
or illbeseeming beast in seeming both!
by my holy order, i thought thy disposition better temper'd.
hast thou slain tybalt?
wilt thou slay thyself?
and stay thy lady too that lives in thee, by doing damned hate upon thyself?
why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet in thee at once which thou at once wouldst lose.
fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit which, like a usurer, abound'st in all, and usest none in that true use indeed which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy noble shape is but a form of wax, digressing from the valour of a man thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, misshapen in the conduct of them both, like powder in a skitless soldier's flask, is set afire by thine own ignorance, and thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
what, rouse thee, man!
thy juliet is alive, for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead tybalt would kill thee, but thou slew'st tybalt the law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend and turns it to exile a pack of blessings lights up upon thy back happiness courts thee in her best array but, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, thou pout' take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed, ascend her chamber, but look thou stay not till the watch be set, for then thou canst not pass to mantua where thou shalt live, till we can find a time to blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back with twenty hundred thousand times more joy than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
go before, commend me to thy lady and bid her hasten all the house to bed, romeo is coming.
o lord, i could have stay'd here all the night o, what learning is!
my lord, i'll tell my lady you will come.
do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
how well my comfort is revived by this!
go hence good night either be gone before the watch be set, sojourn in mantua i'll find out your man, and he shall signify from time to time give me thy hand ' farewell good night.
but that a joy past joy calls out on me, it were a grief, farewell.
things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, look you, she loved her kinsman tybalt dearly, well, we were born to die.
'tis very late, she'll not come down to i promise you, but for your company, i would have been abed an hour ago.
these times of woe afford no time to woo.
madam, commend me to your daughter.
i will, and know her mind early tomorrow tonight she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
sir paris, i will make a desperate tender of my child' i think she will be ruled in all respects by me nay, more, i doubt it not.
wife, go you to her ere you go to bed acquaint her here of my son paris' love and bid her, mark you me, on wednesday next but, soft!
what day is this?
monday, my lord, monday!
ha, ha!
well, wednesday is too soon, o' o' thursday, tell her, she shall be married to this noble earl.
will you be ready?
do you like this haste?
we'll keep no great ado,a friend or two for, hark you, tybalt being slain so late, it may be thought we held him carelessly, being our kinsman, therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, and there an end.
but what say you to thursday?
my lord, i would that thursday were tomorrow.
o' thursday be it, then.
go you to juliet ere you go to bed, prepare her, wife, against this weddingday.
farewell, my lord.
light to my chamber, ho!
afore me!
it is so very very late, that we may call it early by and by.
good night.
wilt thou be gone?
it was the nightingale, and not the lark, that pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear nightly she sings on yon pomegranate believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
it was the lark, the herald of the morn, look, love, what envious streaks night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
i must be gone and live, or stay and die.
yon light is not daylight, i know it, it is some meteor that the sun exhales, to be to thee this night a torchbearer, therefore stay yet thou need'st not to be gone.
let me be ta'en, let me be put to death i am content, so thou wilt have it so.
i'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye, 'tis but the pale reflex of cynthia's brow nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat come, death, and welcome!
juliet wills it so.
how is't, my soul?
let's talk it is not day.
it is, hie hence, be gone, away!
it is the lark that sings so out of tune, straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
some say the lark makes sweet division this doth not so, some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes, o, now i would they had changed voices too!
since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, hunting thee hence with hunt'sup to the day, o, now be gone more light and light it grows.
more light and light more dark and dark our woes!
madam!
nurse?
the day is broke be wary, look about.
then, window, let day in, and let life out.
farewell, farewell!
one kiss, and i'll descend.
art thou gone so?
love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
i must hear from thee every day in the hour, o, by this count i shall be much in years ere i again behold my romeo!
farewell!
i will omit no opportunity that may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
o think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
i doubt it not and all these woes shall serve for sweet discourses in our time to come.
o god, i have an illdivining soul!
methinks i see thee, now thou art below, either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
and trust me, love, dry sorrow drinks our blood.
adieu, adieu!
o fortune, fortune!
if thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
that is renown'd for faith?
be fickle, fortune for then, i hope, thou wilt not keep him long, but send him back.
who is't that calls?
is it my lady mother?
is she not down so late, or up so early?
what unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
why, how now, juliet!
madam, i am not well.
evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
what, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
an if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live therefore, some grief shows much of love but much of grief shows still some want of wit.
yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
so shall you feel the loss, but not the friend which you weep for.
feeling so the loss, cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death, as that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
what villain madam?
that same villain, romeo.
that is, because the traitor murderer lives.
ay, madam, would none but i might venge my cousin's death!
we will have vengeance for it, then weep no more.
i'll send to one in mantua, where that same banish'd runagate doth live, shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram, and then, i hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
indeed, i never shall be satisfied with romeo, till i behold himdead is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
madam, if you could find out but a man to bear a poison, i would temper it that romeo should, upon receipt thereof, soon sleep in quiet.
o, how my heart abhors to hear him named, and cannot come to him.
to wreak the love i bore my cousin upon his body that slaughter'd him!
find thou the means, and i'll find such a man.
but now i'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
what are they, i beseech your ladyship?
well, well, thou hast a careful father, child one who, to put thee from thy heaviness, hath sorted out a sudden day of joy, that thou expect'st not nor i look'd not for.
madam, in happy time, what day is that?
marry, my child, early next thursday morn, the gallant, young and noble gentleman, the county paris, at saint peter's church, shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
now, by saint peter's church and peter too, he shall not make me there a joyful bride.
i wonder at this haste that i must wed ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
i pray you, tell my lord and father, madam, i will not marry yet and, when i do, i swear, it shall be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris.
these are news indeed!
here comes your father tell him so yourself, and see how he will take it at your hands.
when the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew but for the sunset of my brother's son it rains downright.
how now!
a conduit, girl?
what, still in tears?
evermore showering?
in one little body thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind for still thy eyes, which i may call the sea, do ebb and flow with tears the bark thy body is, sailing in this salt flood the winds, thy sighs who, raging with thy tears, and they with them, without a sudden calm, will overset thy tempesttossed body.
how now, wife!
have you deliver'd to her our decree?
ay, sir but she will none, she gives you thanks.
i would the fool were married to her grave!
soft!
take me with you, take me with you, wife.
how!
will she none?
doth she not give us thanks?
is she not proud?
doth she not count her blest, unworthy as she is, that we have wrought so worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
not proud, you have but thankful, proud can i never be of what i hate but thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
how now, how now, choplogic!
what is this?
'proud,' and 'i thank you,' and 'i thank you not' and yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you, thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds, but fettle your fine joints 'gainst thursday next, to go with paris to saint peter's church, or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
out, you greensickness carrion!
out, you baggage!
you tallowface!
fie, fie!
what, are you mad?
good father, i beseech you on my knees, hear me with patience but to speak a word.
hang thee, young baggage!
disobedient wretch!
get thee to church o' thursday, speak not, reply not, do not answer me my fingers itch.
wife, we scarce thought us blest that god had lent us but this only child but now i see this one is one too much, out on her, hilding!
god in heaven bless her!
you are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
and why, my lady wisdom?
hold your tongue, good prudence smatter with your gossips, go.
i speak no treason.
o, god ye godden.
may not one speak?
peace, you mumbling fool!
utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl for here we need it not.
you are too hot.
god's bread!
day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, alone, in company, still my care hath been to have her match' and having now provided a gentleman of noble parentage, of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd, stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts, proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man and then to have a wretched puling fool, a whining mammet, in her fortune's tender, to answer 'i'll not wed i cannot love, i am too young i pray you, pardon me.
' but, as you will not wed, i' look to't, think on't, i do not use to jest.
thursday is near lay hand on heart, an you be mine, i'll give you to my friend and you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, for, by my soul, i'll ne'er acknowledge thee, trust to't, bethink you i'll not be forsworn.
is there no pity sitting in the clouds, that sees into the bottom of my grief?
o, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
delay this marriage for a month, a week or, if you do not, make the bridal bed in that dim monument where tybalt lies.
talk not to me, for i' do as thou wilt, for i have done with thee.
o god!
o nurse, how shall this be prevented?
my husband is on earth, my faith in heaven how shall that faith return again to earth, unless that husband send it me from heaven by leaving earth?
comfort me, counsel me.
alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems upon so soft a subject as myself!
what say'st thou?
hast thou not a word of joy?
some comfort, nurse.
faith, here it is.
romeo is banish'd and all the world to nothing, that he dares ne'er come back to challenge you or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
then, since the case so stands as now it doth, i think it best you married with the county.
o, he's a lovely gentleman!
romeo' an eagle, madam, hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye as paris hath.
beshrew my very heart, i think you are happy in this second match, or if it did not, your first is dead or 'twere as good he were, as living here and you no use of him.
speakest thou from thy heart?
and from my soul too or else beshrew them both.
amen!
what?
well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
and tell my lady i am gone, having displeased my father, to laurence' cell, to make confession and to be absolved.
marry, i will and this is wisely done.
ancient damnation!
o most wicked fiend!
is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue which she hath praised him with above compare so many thousand times?
go, counsellor thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
i'll to the friar, if all else fail, myself have power to die.
on thursday, sir?
the time is very short.
my father capulet will have it so and i am nothing slow to slack his haste.
you say you do not know the lady' uneven is the course, i like it not.
immoderately she weeps for tybalt's death, and therefore have i little talk'd of love for venus smiles not in a house of tears.
now, sir, her father counts it dangerous that she doth give her sorrow so much sway, and in his wisdom hastes our marriage, to stop the inundation of her tears which, too much minded by herself alone, now do you know the reason of this haste.
happily met, my lady and my wife!
that may be, sir, when i may be a wife.
that may be must be, love, on thursday next.
what must be shall be.
that's a certain text.
come you to make confession to this father?
to answer that, i should confess to you.
do not deny to him that you love me.
i will confess to you that i love him.
so will ye, i am sure, that you love me.
if i do so, it will be of more price, being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
the tears have got small victory by that for it was bad enough before their spite.
thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.
that is no slander, sir, which is a truth and what i spake, i spake it to my face.
thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
it may be so, for it is not mine own.
are you at leisure, holy father, now or shall i come to you at evening mass?
my leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
my lord, we must entreat the time alone.
god shield i should disturb devotion!
juliet, till then, adieu and keep this holy kiss.
o shut the door!
and when thou hast done so, come weep with me past hope, past cure, past help!
ah, juliet, i already know thy grief i hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it, on thursday next be married to this county.
tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this, if, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help, do thou but call my resolution wise, and with this knife i'll help it presently.
god join'd my heart and romeo's, thou our hands and ere this hand, by thee to romeo seal'd, shall be the label to another deed, or my true heart with treacherous revolt turn to another, therefore, out of thy longexperienced time, give me some present counsel, or, behold, 'twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife shall play the umpire, arbitrating that which the commission of thy years and art could to no issue of true honour bring.
be not so long to speak i long to die, if what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
hold, i do spy a kind of hope, which craves as desperate an execution.
as that is desperate which we would prevent.
if, rather than to marry county paris, thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, then is it likely thou wilt undertake a thing like death to chide away this shame, and, if thou darest, i'll give thee remedy.
o, bid me leap, rather than marry paris, from off the battlements of yonder tower or walk in thievish ways or bid me lurk where serpents are chain me with roaring bears or shut me nightly in a charnelhouse, o'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones, with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls or bid me go into a newmade grave and hide me with a dead man in his shroud things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble and i will do it without fear or doubt, to live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
hold, then go home, be merry, give consent wednesday is to tomorrow night look that thou lie alone take thou this vial, being then in bed, and this distilled liquor drink thou off when presently through all thy veins shall run a cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse shall keep his native progress, no warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade to paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall, like death, when he shuts up the day of life each part, deprived of supple government, shall, stiff and stark and cold, and in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death thou shalt continue two and forty hours, and then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes to rouse thee from thy bed, then, as the manner of our country is, in thy best robes uncover'd on the bier thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault where all the kindred of the capulets lie.
in the mean time, against thou shalt awake, shall romeo by my letters know our drift, and he and i will watch thy waking, and that very night shall romeo bear thee hence to mantua.
and this shall free thee from this present shame if no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, abate thy valour in the acting it.
give me, give me!
o, tell not me of fear!
hold get you gone, be strong and prosperous i'll send a friar with speed to mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
love give me strength!
and strength shall help afford.
farewell, dear father!
so many guests invite as here are writ.
sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
you shall have none ill, sir for i'll try if they can lick their fingers.
how canst thou try them so?
marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
go, be gone.
we shall be much unfurnished for this time.
what, is my daughter gone to friar laurence?
ay, forsooth.
well, a peevish selfwill'd harlotry it is.
see where she comes from shrift with merry look.
how now, my headstrong!
where have you been gadding?
where i have learn'd me to repent the sin of disobedient opposition to you and your behests, and am enjoin'd by holy laurence to fall prostrate here, pardon, i beseech you!
henceforward i am ever ruled by you.
send for the county i'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
i met the youthful lord at laurence' cell and gave him what becomed love i might, not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
why, i am glad on't this is as't should be.
let me see the county ay, marry, go, i say, and fetch him hither.
now, afore god!
this reverend holy friar, our whole city is much bound to him.
nurse, will you go with me into my closet, to help me sort such needful ornaments as you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
no, not till thursday there is time enough.
go, nurse, we'll to church tomorrow.
'tis now near night.
tush, i will stir about, and all things shall be well, i warrant thee, go thou to juliet, help to deck up her i'll not to bed tonight let me alone i'll play the housewife for this once.
what, ho!
they are all forth.
well, i will walk myself to county paris, to prepare him up against to my heart is wondrous light, since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
ay, but, gentle nurse, i pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, for i have need of many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon my state, which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.
what, are you busy, ho?
need you my help?
no, madam we have cull'd such necessaries as are behoveful for our state to so please you, let me now be left alone, and let the nurse this night sit up with you for, i am sure, you have your hands full all, in this so sudden business.
get thee to bed, and rest for thou hast need.
farewell!
god knows when we shall meet again.
i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins, i' nurse!
what should she do here?
my dismal scene i needs must act alone.
come, vial.
what if this mixture do not work at all?
shall i be married then tomorrow morning?
no, lie thou there.
what if it be a poison, which the friar subtly hath minister'd to have me dead, lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd, because he married me before to romeo?
and yet, methinks, it should not, for he hath still been tried a holy man.
how if, when i am laid into the tomb, i wake before the time that romeo come to redeem me?
there's a fearful point!
shall i not, then, be stifled in the vault, to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, and there die strangled ere my romeo comes?
or, if i live, is it not very like, the horrible conceit of death and night, together with the terror of the place, as in a vault, an ancient receptacle, where, for these many hundred years, the bones where bloody tybalt, yet but green in earth, lies festering in his shroud where, as they say, at some hours in the night spirits resort alack, alack, is it not like that i, so early waking, what with loathsome smells, and shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth, that living mortals, hearing them, o, if i wake, shall i not be distraught, environed with all these hideous fears?
and madly play with my forefather's joints?
and pluck the mangled tybalt from his shroud?
and, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone, as with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
o, look!
methinks i see my cousin's ghost seeking out romeo, that did spit his body upon a rapier' stay, tybalt, stay!
romeo, i come!
this do i drink to thee.
hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
they call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
come, stir, stir, stir!
the second cock hath crow'd, the curfewbell hath rung, 'tis three o' look to the baked meats, spare not for the cost.
go, you cotquean, go, get you to bed faith, you'll be sick tomorrow for this night's watching.
no, what!
i have watch'd ere now all night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
ay, you have been a mousehunt in your time but i will watch you from such watching now.
a jealous hood, a jealous hood!
now, fellow, what's there?
things for the cook, sir but i know not what.
make haste, make haste.
sirrah, call peter, he will show thee where they are.
i have a head, sir, that will find out logs, and never trouble peter for the matter.
mass, and well said a merry whoreson, ha!
thou shalt be loggerhead.
good faith, ' the county will be here with music straight, i hear him near.
nurse!
wife!
what, ho!
what, nurse, i say!
go waken juliet, go and trim her up i' hie, make haste, make haste make haste, i say.
mistress!
what, mistress!
juliet!
fast, i warrant her, why, lamb!
why, lady!
fie, you slugabed!
why, love, i say!
madam!
sweetheart!
why, bride!
what, not a word?
you take your pennyworths now sleep for a week for the next night, i warrant, the county paris hath set up his rest, that you shall rest but little.
god forgive me, marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
i must needs wake her.
madam, madam, madam!
ay, let the county take you in your bed he'll fright you up, i' faith.
will it not be?
what, dress'd!
and in your clothes!
and down again!
i must needs wake you lady!
lady!
lady!
alas, alas!
help, help!
my lady's dead!
o, welladay, that ever i was born!
some aqua vitae, ho!
my lord!
my lady!
what noise is here?
o lamentable day!
what is the matter?
look, look!
o heavy day!
o me, o me!
my child, my only life, revive, look up, or i will die with thee!
help, help!
call help.
for shame, bring juliet forth her lord is come.
she's dead, deceased, she's dead alack the day!
alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
out, alas!
she' her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff death lies on her like an untimely frost upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
o lamentable day!
o woful time!
death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
come, is the bride ready to go to church?
ready to go, but never to return.
o son!
the night before thy weddingday hath death lain with thy wife.
there she lies, flower as she was, deflowered by him.
death is my soninlaw, death is my heir i will die, and leave him all life, living, all is death's.
have i thought long to see this morning's face, and doth it give me such a sight as this?
accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
most miserable hour that e'er time saw in lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
but one, poor one, one poor and loving child, but one thing to rejoice and solace in, and cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
o woe!
o woful, woful, woful day!
most lamentable day, most woful day, that ever, ever, i did yet behold!
o day!
o day!
o day!
o hateful day!
o woful day, o woful day!
beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
most detestable death, by thee beguil'd, by cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
o love!
o life!
not life, but love in death!
despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
uncomfortable time, why camest thou now to murder, murder our solemnity?
o child!
o child!
my soul, and not my child!
dead art thou!
alack!
my child is dead and with my child my joys are buried.
peace, ho, for shame!
confusion's cure lives not in these confusions.
heaven and yourself had part in this fair maid now heaven hath all, your part in her you could not keep from death, but heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
the most you sought was her promotion for ' and weep ye now, seeing she is advanced above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
o, in this love, you love your child so ill, that you run mad, she's not well married that lives married long but she's best married that dies married young.
dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary on this fair corse and, as the custom is, for though fond nature bids us an lament, yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
all things that we ordained festival, turn from their office to black funeral our instruments to melancholy bells, our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast, our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change, our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse, and all things change them to the contrary.
sir, go you in and, madam, go with him and go, sir paris every one prepare the heavens do lour upon you for some ill move them no more by crossing their high will.
faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.
honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up for, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
musicians, o, musicians, 'heart's ease, heart's ' o, an you will have me live, play 'heart's ease.
' why 'heart's ease?
' o, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'my ' o, play me some merry dump, to comfort me.
not a dump we 'tis no time to play now.
you will not, then?
i will then give it you soundly.
what will you give us?
no money, on my faith, but the gleek i will give you the minstrel.
then i will give you the servingcreature.
then will i lay the servingcreature's dagger on your pate.
i'll re you, i'll fa you do you note me?
an you re us and fa us, you note us.
pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
then have at you with my wit!
i will drybeat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.
answer 'when griping grief the heart doth wound, and doleful dumps the mind oppress, then music with her silver sound' why 'silver sound'?
why 'music with her silver sound'?
what say you, simon catling?
marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
pretty!
what say you, hugh rebeck?
i say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.
pretty too!
what say you, james soundpost?
faith, i know not what to say.
o, i cry you mercy i will say for you.
it is 'music with her silver sound,' 'then music with her silver sound with speedy help doth lend redress.
' what a pestilent knave is this same!
hang him, jack!
come, we'll in here tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
if i may trust the flattering truth of sleep, my bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne and all this day an unaccustom'd spirit lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
i dreamt my lady came and found me dead strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!
and breathed such life with kisses in my lips, that i revived, and was an emperor.
ah me!
how sweet is love itself possess'd, when but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
news from verona!
how now, balthasar!
dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
how doth my lady?
is my father well?
how fares my juliet?
that i ask again for nothing can be ill, if she be well.
then she is well, her body sleeps in capel's monument, and her immortal part with angels lives.
i saw her laid low in her kindred's vault, o, pardon me for bringing these ill news, since you did leave it for my office, sir.
is it even so?
then i defy you, stars!
thou know' get me ink and paper, and hire posthorses i will hence tonight.
i do beseech you, sir, your looks are pale and wild, and do import some misadventure.
tush, leave me, and do the thing i bid thee do.
hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
no, my good lord.
get thee gone, and hire those horses i'll be with thee straight.
well, juliet, i will lie with thee tonight.
let' o mischief, thou art swift to enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
i do remember an apothecary, and hereabouts he dwells,which late i noted in tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows, culling of simples meagre were his looks, and in his needy shop a tortoise hung, an alligator stuff'd, and other skins of illshaped fishes and about his shelves a beggarly account of empty boxes, green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds, remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses, were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
noting this penury, to myself i said 'an if a man did need a poison now, whose sale is present death in mantua, here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
' o, this same thought did but forerun my need and this same needy man must sell it me.
as i remember, this should be the house.
being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
what, ho!
apothecary!
who calls so loud?
come hither, man.
hold, let me have a dram of poison, such soonspeeding gear as will disperse itself through all the veins that the lifeweary taker may fall dead and that the trunk may be discharged of breath as violently as hasty powder fired doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
such mortal drugs i have but mantua's law is death to any he that utters them.
art thou so bare and full of wretchedness, and fear'st to die?
famine is in thy cheeks, need and oppression starveth in thine eyes, contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back the world is not thy friend nor the world's law the world affords no law to make thee rich then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
my poverty, but not my will, consents.
i pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
put this in any liquid thing you will, and drink it off and, if you had the strength of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
there is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls, doing more murders in this loathsome world, than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
i sell thee poison thou hast sold me none.
buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
come, cordial and not poison, go with me to juliet's grave for there must i use thee.
holy franciscan friar!
brother, ho!
this same should be the voice of friar john.
what says romeo?
or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
going to find a barefoot brother out one of our order, to associate me, here in this city visiting the sick, and finding him, the searchers of the town, suspecting that we both were in a house where the infectious pestilence did reign, seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth so that my speed to mantua there was stay'd.
who bare my letter, then, to romeo?
i could not send it,here it is again, nor get a messenger to bring it thee, so fearful were they of infection.
unhappy fortune!
by my brotherhood, the letter was not nice but full of charge of dear import, and the neglecting it may do much danger.
friar john, go hence get me an iron crow, and bring it straight unto my cell.
brother, i'll go and bring it thee.
now must i to the monument alone she will beshrew me much that romeo hath had no notice of these accidents but i will write again to mantua, and keep her at my cell till romeo come poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
give me thy torch, hence, yet put it out, for i would not be seen.
under yond yewtrees lay thee all along, holding thine ear close to the hollow ground so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, whistle then to me, as signal that thou hear'st something approach.
give me those flowers.
do as i bid thee, go.
sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed i strew, o woe!
thy canopy is dust and stones which with sweet water nightly i will dew, or, wanting that, with tears distill' the obsequies that i for thee will keep nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
the boy gives warning something doth approach.
what cursed foot wanders this way tonight, to cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
what with a torch!
muffle me, night, awhile.
give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
hold, take this letter early in the morning see thou deliver it to my lord and father.
upon thy life, i charge thee, whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof, and do not interrupt me in my course.
why i descend into this bed of death, is partly to behold my lady's face but chiefly to take thence from her dead finger a precious ring, a ring that i must use therefore hence, but if thou, jealous, dost return to pry in what i further shall intend to do, by heaven, i will tear thee joint by joint the time and my intents are savagewild, more fierce and more inexorable far than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
i will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
so shalt thou show me friendship.
live, and farewell, good fellow.
thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, thus i enforce thy rotten jaws to open, and, in despite, i'll cram thee with more food!
this is that banish'd haughty montague, that murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief, it is supposed, the fair creature died and here is come to do some villanous shame i will apprehend him.
stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile montague!
can vengeance be pursued further than death?
condemned villain, obey, and go with me for thou must die.
i must indeed and therefore came i hither.
good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man fly hence, think upon these gone let them affright thee.
i beseech thee, youth, put not another sin upon my head, o, be gone!
by heaven, i love thee better than myself for i come hither arm' stay not, be gone live, and hereafter say, a madman's mercy bade thee run away.
i do defy thy conjurations, and apprehend thee for a felon here.
wilt thou provoke me?
then have at thee, boy!
o lord, they fight!
i will go call the watch.
o, i am slain!
if thou be merciful, open the tomb, lay me with juliet.
in faith, i will.
let me peruse this face.
mercutio's kinsman, noble county paris!
what said my man, when my betossed soul did not attend him as we rode?
i think said he not so?
or did i dream it so?
or am i mad, hearing him talk of juliet, to think it was so?
o, give me thy hand, one writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
i'll bury thee in a triumphant grave a grave?
o no!
a lantern, slaughter'd youth, for here lies juliet, and her beauty makes this vault a feasting presence full of light.
death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
how oft when men are at the point of death have they been merry!
which their keepers call o, how may i call this a lightning?
o my love!
my wife!
death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath, thou art not conquer'd beauty's ensign yet is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, and death's pale flag is not advanced there.
tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
o, what more favour can i do to thee, than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain to sunder his that was thine enemy?
forgive me, cousin!
ah, dear juliet, why art thou yet so fair?
shall i believe that unsubstantial death is amorous, and that the lean abhorred monster keeps thee here in dark to be his paramour?
for fear of that, i still will stay with thee and never from this palace of dim night here, here will i remain with worms that are thy chambermaids o, here will i set up my everlasting rest, and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars from this worldwearied flesh.
eyes, look your last!
arms, take your last embrace!
and, lips, o you the doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss a dateless bargain to engrossing death!
come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
thou desperate pilot, now at once run on the dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
here's to my love!
o true apothecary!
thy drugs are quick.
thus with a kiss i die.
saint francis be my speed!
how oft tonight have my old feet stumbled at graves!
who's there?
here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
bliss be upon you!
tell me, good my friend, what torch is yond, that vainly lends his light to grubs and eyeless skulls?
as i discern, it burneth in the capel's monument.
it doth so, holy sir and there's my master, one that you love.
who is it?
romeo.
how long hath he been there?
full half an hour.
go with me to the vault.
i dare not, sir my master knows not but i am gone hence and fearfully did menace me with death, if i did stay to look on his intents.
stay, then i'll go alone.
o, much i fear some ill unlucky thing.
as i did sleep under this yewtree here, i dreamt my master and another fought, and that my master slew him.
romeo!
alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains the stony entrance of this sepulchre?
what mean these masterless and gory swords to lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
romeo!
o, pale!
who else?
what, paris too?
and steep'd in blood?
ah, what an unkind hour is guilty of this lamentable chance!
the lady stirs.
o comfortable friar!
where is my lord?
i do remember well where i should be, and there i am.
where is my romeo?
i hear some noise.
lady, come from that nest of death, contagion, a greater power than we can contradict hath thwarted our intents.
come, come away.
thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead and paris too.
come, i'll dispose of thee stay not to question, for the watch is coming come, go, good juliet, i dare no longer stay.
go, get thee hence, for i will not away.
what's here?
a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
poison, i see, o churl!
drunk all, and left no friendly drop to help me after?
i will kiss thy lips haply some poison yet doth hang on them, to make die with a restorative.
thy lips are warm.
yea, noise?
then i'll be brief.
o happy dagger!
this is thy sheath there rust, and let me die.
this is the place there, where the torch doth burn.
the ground is bloody go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
pitiful sight!
here lies the county slain, and juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead, who here hath lain these two days buried.
go, we see the ground whereon these woes do lie but the true ground of all these piteous woes we cannot without circumstance descry.
here's romeo's man we found him in the churchyard.
hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.
here is a friar, that trembles, we took this mattock and this spade from him, as he was coming from this churchyard side.
stay the friar too.
what misadventure is so early up, that calls our person from our morning's rest?
what should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
the people in the street cry romeo, some juliet, and some paris and all run, with open outcry toward our monument.
what fear is this which startles in our ears?
sovereign, here lies the county paris slain and romeo dead and juliet, dead before, warm and new kill'd.
search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
here is a friar, and slaughter'd romeo's man with instruments upon them, fit to open these dead men's tombs.
o heavens!
o wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
this dagger hath mista'enfor, lo, his house is empty on the back of montague, and it missheathed in my daughter's bosom!
o me!
this sight of death is as a bell, that warns my old age to a sepulchre.
come, montague for thou art early up, to see thy son and heir more early down.
alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight grief of my son's exile hath stopp' what further woe conspires against mine age?
look, and thou shalt see.
o thou untaught!
what manners is in this?
to press before thy father to a grave?
seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, till we can clear these ambiguities, and know their spring, their head, their true descent and then will i be general of your woes, meantime forbear, and let mischance be slave to patience.
bring forth the parties of suspicion.
i am the greatest, able to do least, yet most suspected, as the time and place doth make against me of this direful murder and here i stand, both to impeach and purge myself condemned and myself excused.
then say at once what thou dost know in this.
i will be brief, for my short date of breath is not so long as is a tedious tale.
romeo, there dead, was husband to that juliet and she, there dead, that romeo' i married them and their stol'n marriageday was tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death banish'd the newmade bridegroom from the city, for whom, and not for tybalt, juliet pined.
you, to remove that siege of grief from her, betroth'd and would have married her perforce then comes she to me, and, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean to rid her from this second marriage, or in my cell there would she kill herself.
then gave i her, so tutor'd by my art, a sleeping potion which so took effect as i intended, for it wrought on her meantime i writ to romeo, that he should hither come as this dire night, to help to take her from her borrow'd grave, being the time the potion's force should cease.
but he which bore my letter, friar john, was stay'd by accident, and yesternight return'd my letter back.
then all alone at the prefixed hour of her waking, came i to take her from her kindred's vault meaning to keep her closely at my cell, but when i came, some minute ere the time of her awaking, here untimely lay the noble paris and true romeo dead.
she wakes and i entreated her come forth, but then a noise did scare me from the tomb and she, too desperate, would not go with me, but, as it seems, did violence on herself.
all this i know and to the marriage and, if aught in this miscarried by my fault, let my old life be sacrificed, some hour before his time, unto the rigour of severest law.
we still have known thee for a holy man.
where's romeo's man?
what can he say in this?
i brought my master news of juliet's death and then in post he came from mantua to this same place, to this same monument.
this letter he early bid me give his father, and threatened me with death, going in the vault, i departed not and left him there.
give me the letter i will look on it.
where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
sirrah, what made your master in this place?
he came with flowers to strew his lady's grave and bid me stand aloof, anon comes one with light to ope the tomb and by and by my master drew on him and then i ran away to call the watch.
this letter doth make good the friar's words, their course of love, and here he writes that he did buy a poison of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal came to this vault to die, and lie with juliet.
where be these enemies?
capulet!
montague!
see, what a scourge is laid upon your hate, that heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
and i for winking at your discords too all are punish'd.
o brother montague, this is my daughter's jointure, for no more can i demand.
for i will raise her statue in pure gold that while verona by that name is known, there shall no figure at such rate be set as that of true and faithful juliet.
as rich shall romeo's by his lady's lie poor sacrifices of our enmity!
a glooming peace this morning with it brings the sun, for sorrow, go hence, to have more talk of these sad things some shall be pardon'd, for never was a story of more woe than this of juliet and her romeo.
i wonder how the king escaped our hands.
while we pursued the horsemen of the north, whereat the great lord of northumberland, whose warlike ears could never brook retreat, cheer'd up the drooping army and himself, lord clifford and lord stafford, all abreast, charged our main battle's front, and breaking in were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
lord stafford's father, duke of buckingham, is either slain or wounded dangerously that this is true, father, behold his blood.
and, brother, here's the earl of wiltshire's blood, whom i encounter'd as the battles join'd.
speak thou for me and tell them what i did.
richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
but is your grace dead, my lord of somerset?
such hope have all the line of john of gaunt!
thus do i hope to shake king henry's head.
and so do i.
victorious prince of york, before i see thee seated in that throne which now the house of lancaster usurps, i vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
this is the palace of the fearful king, possess it, york for this is thine and not king henry's heirs' assist me, then, sweet warwick, and i will for hither we have broken in by force.
we'll all assist you he that flies shall die.
thanks, stay by me, my lords and, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
and when the king comes, offer no violence, unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
the queen this day here holds her parliament, by words or blows here let us win our right.
arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.
the bloody parliament shall this be call'd, unless plantagenet, duke of york, be king, and bashful henry deposed, whose cowardice hath made us bywords to our enemies.
then leave me not, my lords be resolute i mean to take possession of my right.
neither the king, nor he that loves him best, the proudest he that holds up lancaster, dares stir a wing, if warwick shake his bells.
i'll plant plantagenet, resolve thee, richard claim the english crown.
my lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits, belike he means, back'd by the power of warwick, that false peer, to aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
earl of northumberland, he slew thy father.
and thine, lord clifford and you both have vow'd revenge on him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.
if i be not, heavens be revenged on me!
the hope thereof makes clifford mourn in steel.
what, shall we suffer this?
let' my heart for anger burns i cannot brook it.
be patient, gentle earl of westmoreland.
patience is for poltroons, he durst not sit there, had your father lived.
my gracious lord, here in the parliament let us assail the family of york.
well hast thou spoken, be it so.
ah, know you not the city favours them, and they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
but when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
far be the thought of this from henry's heart, to make a shambles of the parliamenthouse!
cousin of exeter, frowns, words and threats shall be the war that henry means to use.
thou factious duke of york, descend my throne, and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet i am thy sovereign.
i am thine.
for shame, he made thee duke of york.
'twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
thy father was a traitor to the crown.
exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown in following this usurping henry.
whom should he follow but his natural king?
true, clifford and that's richard duke of york.
and shall i stand, and thou sit in my throne?
content thyself.
be duke of lancaster let him be king.
he is both king and duke of lancaster and that the lord of westmoreland shall maintain.
and warwick shall disprove it.
you forget that we are those which chased you from the field and slew your fathers, and with colours spread march'd through the city to the palace gates.
yes, warwick, i remember it to my grief and, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons, thy kinsman and thy friends, i'll have more lives than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
urge it no more lest that, instead of words, i send thee, warwick, such a messenger as shall revenge his death before i stir.
poor clifford!
how i scorn his worthless threats!
will you we show our title to the crown?
if not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
what title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
thy father was, as thou art, duke of york thy grandfather, roger mortimer, i am the son of henry the fifth, who made the dauphin and the french to stoop and seized upon their towns and provinces.
talk not of france, sith thou hast lost it all.
the lord protector lost it, when i was crown'd i was but nine months old.
you are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
sweet father, do so set it on your head.
good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms, let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.
sons, peace!
peace, thou!
and give king henry leave to speak.
hear him, lords and be you silent and attentive too, for he that interrupts him shall not live.
think'st thou that i will leave my kingly throne, wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
first shall war unpeople this my realm ay, and their colours, often borne in france, and now in england to our heart's great sorrow, shall be my windingsheet.
why faint you, lords?
my title's good, and better far than his.
prove it, henry, and thou shalt be king.
henry the fourth by conquest got the crown.
'twas by rebellion against his king.
what then?
an if he may, then am i lawful king for richard, in the view of many lords, resign'd the crown to henry the fourth, whose heir my father was, and i am his.
he rose against him, being his sovereign, and made him to resign his crown perforce.
suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd, think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
no for he could not so resign his crown but that the next heir should succeed and reign.
art thou against us, duke of exeter?
his is the right, and therefore pardon me.
why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
my conscience tells me he is lawful king.
plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st, think not that henry shall be so deposed.
deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
'tis not thy southern power, of essex, norfolk, suffolk, nor of kent, which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud, can set the duke up in despite of me.
king henry, be thy title right or wrong, may that ground gape and swallow me alive, where i shall kneel to him that slew my father!
o clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
henry of lancaster, resign thy crown.
what mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
do right unto this princely duke of york, or i will fill the house with armed men, and over the chair of state, where now he sits, write up his title with usurping blood.
my lord of warwick, let me for this my lifetime reign as king.
confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs, and thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.
richard plantagenet, enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
what wrong is this unto the prince your son!
what good is this to england and himself!
base, fearful and despairing henry!
how hast thou injured both thyself and us!
i cannot stay to hear these articles.
nor i.
come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.
farewell, fainthearted and degenerate king, in whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.
be thou a prey unto the house of york, and die in bands for this unmanly deed!
in dreadful war mayst thou be overcome, or live in peace abandon'd and despised!
turn this way, henry, and regard them not.
they seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
ah, exeter!
why should you sigh, my lord?
not for myself, lord warwick, but my son, whom i unnaturally shall disinherit.
i here entail the crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever conditionally, that here thou take an oath to cease this civil war, and, whilst i live, to honour me as thy king and sovereign, and neither by treason nor hostility to seek to put me down and reign thyself.
this oath i willingly take and will perform.
long live king henry!
plantagenet embrace him.
and long live thou and these thy forward sons!
now york and lancaster are reconciled.
accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!
farewell, my gracious lord i'll to my castle.
and i'll keep london with my soldiers.
and i to norfolk with my followers.
and i unto the sea from whence i came.
and i, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
here comes the queen, i'll steal away.
exeter, so will i.
nay, go not from me i will follow thee.
be patient, gentle queen, and i will stay.
who can be patient in such extremes?
ah, wretched man!
would i had died a maid and never seen thee, never borne thee son, seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
hadst thou but loved him half so well as i, or felt that pain which i did for him once, or nourish'd him as i did with my blood, thou wouldst have left thy dearest heartblood there, rather than have that savage duke thine heir and disinherited thine only son.
father, if you be king, why should not i succeed?
pardon me, margaret pardon me, the earl of warwick and the duke enforced me.
enforced thee!
art thou king, and wilt be forced?
i shame to hear thee speak.
ah, timorous wretch!
thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me and given unto the house of york such head as thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
to entail him and his heirs unto the crown, what is it, but to make thy sepulchre and creep into it far before thy time?
warwick is chancellor and the lord of calais stern falconbridge commands the narrow seas the duke is made protector of the realm and yet shalt thou be safe?
such safety finds the trembling lamb environed with wolves.
had i been there, which am a silly woman, the soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes before i would have granted to that act.
but thou preferr' and seeing thou dost, i here divorce myself both from thy table, henry, and thy bed, until that act of parliament be repeal'd whereby my son is disinherited.
the northern lords that have forsworn thy colours will follow mine, if once they see them spread and spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace and utter ruin of the house of york.
thus do i leave thee.
come, son, let's away our army is ready come, we'll after them.
stay, gentle margaret, and hear me speak.
get thee gone.
gentle son edward, thou wilt stay with me?
ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.
when i return with victory from the field i' till then i'll follow her.
come, son, away we may not linger thus.
poor queen!
how love to me and to her son hath made her break out into terms of rage!
revenged may she be on that hateful duke, whose haughty spirit, winged with desire, will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
i'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
come, cousin you shall be the messenger.
and i, i hope, shall reconcile them all.
3 king henry vi brother, though i be youngest, give me leave.
no, i can better play the orator.
but i have reasons strong and forcible.
why, how now, sons and brother!
at a strife?
what is your quarrel?
how began it first?
no quarrel, but a slight contention.
about what?
about that which concerns your grace and us the crown of england, father, which is yours.
mine boy?
not till king henry be dead.
your right depends not on his life or death.
now you are heir, by giving the house of lancaster leave to breathe, it will outrun you, father, in the end.
i took an oath that he should quietly reign.
i would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
no god forbid your grace should be forsworn.
i shall be, if i claim by open war.
i'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
thou canst not, son it is impossible.
an oath is of no moment, being not took before a true and lawful magistrate, henry had none, but did usurp the place then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose, your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
therefore, to arms!
and, father, do but think how sweet a thing it is to wear a crown within whose circuit is elysium and all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
why do we finger thus?
i cannot rest until the white rose that i wear be dyed even in the lukewarm blood of henry's heart.
richard, enough i will be king, or die.
brother, thou shalt to london presently, and whet on warwick to this enterprise.
thou, richard, shalt to the duke of norfolk, and tell him privily of our intent.
you edward, shall unto my lord cobham, in them i trust for they are soldiers, witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
while you are thus employ'd, what resteth more, but that i seek occasion how to rise, and yet the king not privy to my drift, nor any of the house of lancaster?
but, what news?
why comest thou in such post?
the queen with all the northern earls and lords she is hard by with twenty thousand men and therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
ay, with my sword.
what!
think'st thou that we fear them?
edward and richard, you shall stay with me let noble warwick, cobham, and the rest, whom we have left protectors of the king, with powerful policy strengthen themselves, and trust not simple henry nor his oaths.
brother, i go i'll win them, and thus most humbly i do take my leave.
sir john and sir hugh mortimer, mine uncles, you are come to sandal in a happy hour the army of the queen mean to besiege us.
she shall not need we'll meet her in the field.
what, with five thousand men?
ay, with five hundred, father, a woman's general what should we fear?
let's set our men in order, and issue forth and bid them battle straight.
five men to twenty!
though the odds be great, i doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
many a battle have i won in france, why should i not now have the like success?
3 king henry vi ah, whither shall i fly to 'scape their hands?
ah, tutor, look where bloody clifford comes!
chaplain, away!
thy priesthood saves thy life.
as for the brat of this accursed duke, whose father slew my father, he shall die.
and i, my lord, will bear him company.
soldiers, away with him!
ah, clifford, murder not this innocent child, lest thou be hated both of god and man!
how now!
is he dead already?
or is it fear that makes him close his eyes?
i'll open them.
so looks the pentup lion o'er the wretch that trembles under his devouring paws and so he walks, insulting o'er his prey, and so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
ah, gentle clifford, kill me with thy sword, and not with such a cruel threatening look.
sweet clifford, hear me speak before i die.
be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
in vain thou speak'st, poor boy my father's blood hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
then let my father' he is a man, and, clifford, cope with him.
had thy brethren here, their lives and thine were not revenge sufficient for me no, if i digg'd up thy forefathers' graves and hung their rotten coffins up in chains, it could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
the sight of any of the house of york is as a fury to torment my soul and till i root out their accursed line and leave not one alive, i live in hell.
therefore o, let me pray before i take my death!
to thee i pray sweet clifford, pity me!
such pity as my rapier's point affords.
why wilt thou slay me?
thy father hath.
but 'twas ere i was born.
thou hast one son for his sake pity me, lest in revenge thereof, sith god is just, he be as miserably slain as i.
ah, let me live in prison all my days and when i give occasion of offence, then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
no cause!
thy father slew my father therefore, die.
di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!
plantagenet!
i come, plantagenet!
and this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood, congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
3 king henry vi my uncles both are slain in rescuing me and all my followers to the eager foe turn back and fly, like ships before the wind or lambs pursued by hungerstarved wolves.
my sons, but this i know, they have demean'd themselves like men born to renown by life or death.
three times did richard make a lane to me.
and thrice cried 'courage, father!
fight it out!
' and full as oft came edward to my side, with purple falchion, painted to the hilt in blood of those that had encounter' and when the hardiest warriors did retire, richard cried 'charge!
and give no foot of ground!
' and cried 'a crown, or else a glorious tomb!
a sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!
' with this, but, out, alas!
we bodged again as i have seen a swan with bootless labour swim against the tide and spend her strength with overmatching waves.
ah, hark!
the fatal followers do pursue and were i strong, the sands are number'd that make up my life here must i stay, and here my life must end.
come, bloody clifford, rough northumberland, i am your butt, and i abide your shot.
yield to our mercy, proud plantagenet.
ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm, with downright payment, show'd unto my father.
now phaethon hath tumbled from his car, and made an evening at the noontide prick.
my ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth and in that hope i throw mine eyes to heaven, scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
why come you not?
what!
multitudes, and fear?
so cowards fight when they can fly no further so doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons so desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives, breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
o clifford, but bethink thee once again, and in thy thought o'errun my former time and, if though canst for blushing, view this face, and bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
i will not bandy with thee word for word, but buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.
hold, valiant clifford!
for a thousand causes i would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
speak thou, northumberland.
hold, clifford!
do not honour him so much to prick thy finger, what valour were it, when a cur doth grin, for one to thrust his hand between his teeth, when he might spurn him with his foot away?
it is war's prize to take all vantages and ten to one is no impeach of valour.
ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
so doth the cony struggle in the net.
so triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty so true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.
what would your grace have done unto him now?
brave warriors, clifford and northumberland, come, make him stand upon this molehill here, that raught at mountains with outstretched arms, yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
what!
was it you that would be england's king?
was't you that revell'd in our parliament, and made a preachment of your high descent?
where are your mess of sons to back you now?
the wanton edward, and the lusty george?
and where's that valiant crookback prodigy, dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
or, with the rest, where is your darling rutland?
look, i stain'd this napkin with the blood that valiant clifford, with his rapier's point, made issue from the bosom of the boy and if thine eyes can water for his death, i give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
alas poor york!
but that i hate thee deadly, i should lament thy miserable state.
i prithee, grieve, to make me merry, york.
what, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails that not a tear can fall for rutland's death?
why art thou patient, man?
thou shouldst be mad and i, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
stamp, rave, and fret, that i may sing and dance.
thou wouldst be fee'd, i see, york cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
a crown for york!
and, lords, hold you his hands, whilst i do set it on.
ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
ay, this is he that took king henry's chair, and this is he was his adopted heir.
but how is it that great plantagenet is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
as i bethink me, you should not be king till our king henry had shook hands with death.
and will you pale your head in henry's glory, and rob his temples of the diadem, now in his life, against your holy oath?
o, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!
off with the crown, and with the crown his head and, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
that is my office, for my father's sake.
nay, stay lets hear the orisons he makes.
shewolf of france, but worse than wolves of france, whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
how illbeseeming is it in thy sex to triumph, like an amazonian trull, upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
but that thy face is, vizardlike, unchanging, made impudent with use of evil deeds, i would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
to tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived, were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
thy father bears the type of king of naples, of both the sicils and jerusalem, yet not so wealthy as an english yeoman.
hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
it needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen, unless the adage must be verified, that beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'tis beauty that doth oft make women proud but, god he knows, 'tis virtue that doth make them most admired the contrary doth make thee wonder' 'tis government that makes them seem divine thou art as opposite to every good as the antipodes are unto us, or as the south to the septentrion.
o tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide!
how couldst thou drain the lifeblood of the child, to bid the father wipe his eyes withal, and yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
bids't thou me rage?
why, wouldst have me weep?
why, for raging wind blows up incessant showers, and when the rage allays, the rain begins.
these tears are my sweet rutland' and every drop cries vengeance for his death, 'gainst thee, fell clifford, and thee, false frenchwoman.
beshrew me, but his passion moves me so that hardly can i cheque my eyes from tears.
that face of his the hungry cannibals would not have touch'd, would not have stain' but you are more inhuman, more inexorable, o, ten times more, than tigers of hyrcania.
see, ruthless queen, a hapless father' this cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy, and i with tears do wash the blood away.
keep thou the napkin, and if thou tell'st the heavy story right, upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears yea even my foes will shed fastfalling tears, and say 'alas, it was a piteous deed!
' there, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse and in thy need such comfort come to thee as now i reap at thy too cruel hand!
hardhearted clifford, my soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
had he been slaughterman to all my kin, i should not for my life but weep with him.
to see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
what, weepingripe, my lord northumberland?
think but upon the wrong he did us all, and that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
and here's to right our gentlehearted king.
open thy gate of mercy, gracious god!
my soul flies through these wounds to seek out thee.
off with his head, and set it on york gates so york may overlook the town of york.
3 king henry vi i wonder how our princely father 'scaped, or whether he be 'scaped away or no from clifford's and northumberland' had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news had he been slain, we should have heard the news or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard the happy tidings of his good escape.
how fares my brother?
why is he so sad?
i cannot joy, until i be resolved where our right valiant father is become.
i saw him in the battle range about and watch'd him how he singled clifford forth.
methought he bore him in the thickest troop as doth a lion in a herd of neat or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs, who having pinch'd a few and made them cry, the rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
so fared our father with his enemies methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
see how the morning opes her golden gates, and takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
how well resembles it the prime of youth, trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!
dazzle mine eyes, or do i see three suns?
three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun not separated with the racking clouds, but sever'd in a pale clearshining sky.
see, see!
they join, embrace, and seem to kiss, as if they vow' now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
in this the heaven figures some event.
'tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
i think it cites us, brother, to the field, that we, the sons of brave plantagenet, each one already blazing by our meeds, should notwithstanding join our lights together and overshine the earth as this the world.
whate'er it bodes, henceforward will i bear upon my target three fairshining suns.
nay, by your leave i speak it, you love the breeder better than the male.
but what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
ah, one that was a woful lookeron when as the noble duke of york was slain, your princely father and my loving lord!
o, speak no more, for i have heard too much.
say how he died, for i will hear it all.
environed he was with many foes, and stood against them, as the hope of troy against the greeks that would have enter'd troy.
but hercules himself must yield to odds and many strokes, though with a little axe, hew down and fell the hardesttimber'd oak.
by many hands your father was subdued but only slaughter'd by the ireful arm of unrelenting clifford and the queen, who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite, laugh'd in his face and when with grief he wept, the ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks a napkin steeped in the harmless blood of sweet young rutland, and after many scorns, many foul taunts, they took his head, and on the gates of york they set the same and there it doth remain, the saddest spectacle that e'er i view'd.
sweet duke of york, our prop to lean upon, now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
o clifford, boisterous clifford!
thou hast slain the flower of europe for his chivalry and treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him, for hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
now my soul' ah, would she break from hence, that this my body might in the ground be closed up in rest!
for never henceforth shall i joy again, never, o never shall i see more joy!
i cannot weep for all my body's moisture scarce serves to quench my furnace nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen for selfsame wind that i should speak withal is kindling coals that fires all my breast, and burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
tears then for babes blows and revenge for me richard, i bear thy name i'll venge thy death, or die renowned by attempting it.
his name that valiant duke hath left with thee his dukedom and his chair with me is left.
nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird, show thy descent by gazing ' for chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
how now, fair lords!
what fare?
what news abroad?
great lord of warwick, if we should recount our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance stab poniards in our flesh till all were told, the words would add more anguish than the wounds.
o valiant lord, the duke of york is slain!
o warwick, warwick!
that plantagenet, which held three dearly as his soul's redemption, is by the stern lord clifford done to death.
ten days ago i drown'd these news in tears and now, to add more measure to your woes, i come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
after the bloody fray at wakefield fought, where your brave father breathed his latest gasp, tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run, were brought me of your loss and his depart.
i, then in london keeper of the king, muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends, and very well appointed, as i thought, march'd toward saint alban's to intercept the queen, bearing the king in my behalf along for by my scouts i was advertised that she was coming with a full intent to dash our late decree in parliament touching king henry's oath and your succession.
short tale to make, we at saint alban's met our battles join'd, but whether 'twas the coldness of the king, who look'd full gently on his warlike queen, that robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen or whether 'twas report of her success or more than common fear of clifford's rigour, who thunders to his captives blood and death, but to conclude with truth, their weapons like to lightning came and went our soldiers', like the nightowl's lazy flight, or like an idle thresher with a flail, fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
i cheer'd them up with justice of our cause, but all in vain they had no heart to fight, and we in them no hope to win the day so that we fled the king unto the queen lord george your brother, norfolk and myself, in haste, posthaste, for in the marches here we heard you were, making another head to fight again.
where is the duke of norfolk, gentle warwick?
and when came george from burgundy to england?
some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers and for your brother, he was lately sent from your kind aunt, duchess of burgundy, with aid of soldiers to this needful war.
'twas odds, belike, oft have i heard his praises in pursuit, but ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
nor now my scandal, richard, dost thou hear for thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine can pluck the diadem from faint henry's head, and wring the awful sceptre from his fist, were he as famous and as bold in war as he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
i know it well, lord warwick 'tis love i bear thy glories makes me speak.
but in this troublous time what's to be done?
shall we go throw away our coats of steel, and wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns, numbering our avemaries with our beads?
or shall we on the helmets of our foes tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
if for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.
why, therefore warwick came to seek you out and therefore comes my brother montague.
attend me, lords.
the proud insulting queen, with clifford and the haught northumberland, and of their feather many more proud birds, have wrought the easymelting king like wax.
he swore consent to your succession, his oath enrolled in the parliament and now to london all the crew are gone, to frustrate both his oath and what beside may make against the house of lancaster.
their power, i think, now, if the help of norfolk and myself, with all the friends that thou, brave earl of march, amongst the loving welshmen canst procure, will but amount to five and twenty thousand, why, via!
to london will we march amain, and once again bestride our foaming steeds, and once again cry 'charge upon our foes!
' but never once again turn back and fly.
ay, ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day, that cries 'retire,' if warwick bid him stay.
lord warwick, on thy shoulder will i lean and when thou fail'stas god forbid the hour!
must edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!
no longer earl of march, the next degree is england's royal throne for king of england shalt thou be proclaim'd in every borough as we pass along and he that throws not up his cap for joy shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
king edward, valiant richard, montague, stay we no longer, dreaming of renown, but sound the trumpets, and about our task.
then, clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel, as thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds, i come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.
god and saint george for us!
how now!
what news?
the duke of norfolk sends you word by me, the queen is coming with a puissant host and craves your company for speedy counsel.
why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
3 king henry vi welcome, my lord, to this brave town of york.
yonder's the head of that archenemy that sought to be encompass' doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
ay, to see this sight, it irks my very soul.
withhold revenge, dear god!
'tis not my fault, nor wittingly have i infringed my vow.
my gracious liege, this too much lenity and harmful pity must be laid aside.
to whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
not to the beast that would usurp their den.
whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
not his that spoils her young before her face.
who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
not he that sets his foot upon her back.
the smallest worm will turn being trodden on, and doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
ambitious york doth level at thy crown, he, but a duke, would have his son a king, and raise his issue, like a loving sire thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son, didst yield consent to disinherit him, which argued thee a most unloving father.
unreasonable creatures feed their young and though man's face be fearful to their eyes, yet, in protection of their tender ones, who hath not seen them, even with those wings which sometime they have used with fearful flight, make war with him that climb'd unto their nest, offer their own lives in their young's defence?
for shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
were it not pity that this goodly boy should lose his birthright by his father's fault, and long hereafter say unto his child, 'what my greatgrandfather and his grandsire got my careless father fondly gave away'?
ah, what a shame were this!
look on the boy and let his manly face, which promiseth successful fortune, steel thy melting heart to hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
full well hath clifford play'd the orator, inferring arguments of mighty force.
but, clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear that things illgot had ever bad success?
and happy always was it for that son whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
i'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind and would my father had left me no more!
for all the rest is held at such a rate as brings a thousandfold more care to keep than in possession and jot of pleasure.
ah, cousin york!
would thy best friends did know how it doth grieve me that thy head is here!
my lord, our foes are nigh, and this soft courage makes your followers faint.
unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
edward, kneel down.
edward plantagenet, arise a knight and learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.
my gracious father, by your kingly leave, i'll draw it as apparent to the crown, and in that quarrel use it to the death.
why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
royal commanders, for with a band of thirty thousand men comes warwick, backing of the duke of york and in the towns, as they do march along, proclaims him king, darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
the queen hath best success when you are absent.
ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
why, that's my fortune too therefore i'll stay.
be it with resolution then to fight.
my royal father, cheer these noble lords unsheathe your sword, good father cry 'saint george!
' now, perjured henry!
wilt thou kneel for grace, and set thy diadem upon my head or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
i am his king, and he should bow his knee since when, his oath is broke for, as i hear, you, that are king, though he do wear the crown, have caused him, by new act of parliament, to blot out me, and put his own son in.
who should succeed the father but the son?
are you there, butcher?
o, i cannot speak!
ay, crookback, here i stand to answer thee, or any he the proudest of thy sort.
'twas you that kill'd young rutland, was it not?
ay, and old york, and yet not satisfied.
for god's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
what say'st thou, henry, wilt thou yield the crown?
why, how now, longtongued warwick!
dare you speak?
when you and i met at saint alban's last, your legs did better service than your hands.
then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
you said so much before, and yet you fled.
'twas not your valour, clifford, drove me thence.
no, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
northumberland, i hold thee reverently.
break off the parley for scarce i can refrain the execution of my bigswoln heart upon that clifford, that cruel childkiller.
i slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?
ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward, as thou didst kill our tender brother rutland but ere sunset i'll make thee curse the deed.
have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
i prithee, i am a king, and privileged to speak.
my liege, the wound that bred this meeting here cannot be cured by words therefore be still.
then, executioner, by him that made us all, i am resolved that clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
say, henry, shall i have my right, or no?
a thousand men have broke their fasts today, that ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
if thou deny, their blood upon thy head for york in justice puts his armour on.
if that be right which warwick says is right, there is no wrong, but every thing is right.
whoever got thee, there thy mother stands for, well i wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.
but thou art neither like thy sire nor dam but like a foul misshapen stigmatic, mark'd by the destinies to be avoided, as venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.
iron of naples hid with english gilt, whose father bears the title of a king, as if a channel should be call'd the sea, shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught, to let thy tongue detect thy baseborn heart?
a wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns, to make this shameless callet know herself.
helen of greece was fairer far than thou, although thy husband may be menelaus and ne'er was agamemnon's brother wrong'd by that false woman, as this king by thee.
his father revell'd in the heart of france, and tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop and had he match'd according to his state, he might have kept that glory to this day but when he took a beggar to his bed, and graced thy poor sire with his bridalday, even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him, that wash'd his father's fortunes forth of france, and heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
for what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept and we, in pity of the gentle king, had slipp'd our claim until another age.
but when we saw our sunshine made thy spring, and that thy summer bred us no increase, we set the axe to thy usurping root and though the edge hath something hit ourselves, yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike, we'll never leave till we have hewn thee down, or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
and, in this resolution, i defy thee not willing any longer conference, since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
sound trumpets!
let our bloody colours wave!
and either victory, or else a grave.
stay, edward.
no, wrangling woman, we' these words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
3 king henry vi forspent with toil, as runners with a race, i lay me down a little while to breathe for strokes received, and many blows repaid, have robb'd my strongknit sinews of their strength, and spite of spite needs must i rest awhile.
smile, gentle heaven!
or strike, ungentle death!
for this world frowns, and edward's sun is clouded.
how now, my lord!
what hap?
what hope of good?
our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair our ranks are broke, what counsel give you?
whither shall we fly?
bootless is flight, they follow us with wings and weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
ah, warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk, broach'd with the steely point of clifford's lance and in the very pangs of death he cried, like to a dismal clangour heard from far, 'warwick, revenge!
brother, revenge my death!
' so, underneath the belly of their steeds, that stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood, the noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
i'll kill my horse, because i will not fly.
why stand we like softhearted women here, wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage and look upon, as if the tragedy were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
here on my knee i vow to god above, i'll never pause again, never stand still, till either death hath closed these eyes of mine or fortune given me measure of revenge.
o warwick, i do bend my knee with thine and in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
and, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face, i throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee, thou setter up and plucker down of kings, beseeching thee, if with they will it stands that to my foes this body must be prey, yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope, and give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
now, lords, take leave until we meet again, where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.
brother, give me thy hand and, gentle warwick, i, that did never weep, now melt with woe that winter should cut off our springtime so.
away, away!
once more, sweet lords farewell.
yet let us all together to our troops, and give them leave to fly that will not stay and call them pillars that will stand to us and, if we thrive, promise them such rewards this may plant courage in their quailing breasts for yet is hope of life and victory.
forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
3 king henry vi now, clifford, suppose this arm is for the duke of york, and this for rutland both bound to revenge, wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.
now, richard, this is the hand that stabb'd thy father york and this the hand that slew thy brother rutland and here's the heart that triumphs in their death and cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother to execute the like upon thyself and so, have at thee!
nay warwick, single out some other chase for i myself will hunt this wolf to death.
3 king henry vi this battle fares like to the morning's war, when dying clouds contend with growing light, what time the shepherd, blowing of his nails, can neither call it perfect day nor night.
now sways it this way, like a mighty sea forced by the tide to combat with the wind now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind now one the better, then another best both tugging to be victors, breast to breast, so is the equal of this fell war.
here on this molehill will i sit me down.
to whom god will, there be the victory!
for margaret my queen, and clifford too, have chid me from the battle swearing both they prosper best of all when i am thence.
would i were dead!
if god's good will were so for what is in this world but grief and woe?
o god!
methinks it were a happy life, to be no better than a homely swain to sit upon a hill, as i do now, to carve out dials quaintly, point by point, thereby to see the minutes how they run, how many make the hour full complete how many hours bring about the day how many days will finish up the year how many years a mortal man may live.
when this is known, so many hours must i tend my flock so many hours must i take my rest so many hours must i contemplate so many hours must i sport myself so many days my ewes have been with young so minutes, hours, days, months, and years, pass'd over to the end they were created, would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
ah, what a life were this!
how sweet!
how lovely!
gives not the hawthornbush a sweeter shade to shepherds looking on their silly sheep, than doth a rich embroider'd canopy to kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
o, yes, it doth a thousandfold it doth.
and to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds, his cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
his wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade, all which secure and sweetly he enjoys, is far beyond a prince's delicates, his viands sparkling in a golden cup, his body couched in a curious bed, when care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.
ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
this man, whom hand to hand i slew in fight, may be possessed with some store of crowns and i, that haply take them from him now, may yet ere night yield both my life and them to some man else, as this dead man doth me.
who's this?
o god!
it is my father's face, whom in this conflict i unwares have kill'd.
o heavy times, begetting such events!
from london by the king was i press'd forth my father, being the earl of warwick's man, came on the part of york, press'd by his master and i, who at his hands received my life, him have by my hands of life bereaved him.
pardon me, god, i knew not what i did!
and pardon, father, for i knew not thee!
my tears shall wipe away these bloody marks and no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
o piteous spectacle!
o bloody times!
whiles lions war and battle for their dens, poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
weep, wretched man, i'll aid thee tear for tear and let our hearts and eyes, like civil war, be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.
thou that so stoutly hast resisted me, give me thy gold, for i have bought it with an hundred blows.
is this our foeman's face?
ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
ah, boy, if any life be left in thee, throw up thine eye!
see, see what showers arise, blown with the windy tempest of my heart, upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
o, pity, god, this miserable age!
what stratagems, how fell, how butcherly, erroneous, mutinous and unnatural, this deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
o boy, thy father gave thee life too soon, and hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
woe above woe!
grief more than common grief!
o that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
o pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
the red rose and the white are on his face, the one his purple blood right well resembles the other his pale cheeks, methinks, wither one rose, and let the other flourish if you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
how will my mother for a father's death take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!
how will my wife for slaughter of my son shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!
how will the country for these woful chances misthink the king and not be satisfied!
was ever son so rued a father's death?
was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
much is your sorrow mine ten times so much.
i'll bear thee hence, where i may weep my fill.
these arms of mine shall be thy windingsheet my heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre, for from my heart thine image ne'er shall go my sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell and so obsequious will thy father be, even for the loss of thee, having no more, as priam was for all his valiant sons.
i'll bear thee hence and let them fight that will, for i have murdered where i should not kill.
sadhearted men, much overgone with care, here sits a king more woful than you are.
fly, father, fly!
for all your friends are fled, away!
for death doth hold us in pursuit.
mount you, my lord edward and richard, like a brace of greyhounds having the fearful flying hare in sight, with fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath, and bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands, are at our backs and therefore hence amain.
away!
nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed i'll away before.
nay, take me with thee, not that i fear to stay, but love to go whither the queen intends.
forward away!
3 king henry vi here burns my candle out ay, here it dies, which, whiles it lasted, gave king henry light.
o lancaster, i fear thy overthrow more than my body's parting with my soul!
my love and fear glued many friends to thee and, now i fall, thy tough commixture melts.
impairing henry, strengthening misproud york, the common people swarm like summer flies and whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
and who shines now but henry's enemies?
o phoebus, hadst thou never given consent that phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds, thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
and, henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do, or as thy father and his father did, giving no ground unto the house of york, they never then had sprung like summer flies i and ten thousand in this luckless realm had left no mourning widows for our death and thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
for what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
and what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds no way to fly, the foe is merciless, and will not pity for at their hands i have deserved no pity.
the air hath got into my deadly wounds, and much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
come, york and richard, warwick and the rest i stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.
now breathe we, good fortune bids us pause, and smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
some troops pursue the bloodyminded queen, that led calm henry, though he were a king, as doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust, command an argosy to stem the waves.
but think you, lords, that clifford fled with them?
no, 'tis impossible he should escape, for, though before his face i speak the words your brother richard mark' and wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
a deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
and, now the battle's ended, if friend or foe, let him be gently used.
revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis clifford who not contented that he lopp'd the branch in hewing rutland when his leaves put forth, but set his murdering knife unto the root from whence that tender spray did sweetly spring, i mean our princely father, duke of york.
from off the gates of york fetch down the head, your father's head, which clifford placed there measure for measure must be answered.
bring forth that fatal screechowl to our house, now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound, and his illboding tongue no more shall speak.
i think his understanding is bereft.
speak, clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life, and he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
o, would he did!
'tis but his policy to counterfeit, because he would avoid such bitter taunts which in the time of death he gave our father.
if so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
while we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
thou didst love york, and i am son to york.
thou pitied'st rutland i will pity thee.
where's captain margaret, to fence you now?
they mock thee, swear as thou wast wont.
what, not an oath?
nay, then the world goes hard when clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
i know by that he's dead and, by my soul, if this right hand would buy two hour's life, that i in all despite might rail at him, this hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst york and young rutland could not satisfy.
ay, but he' off with the traitor's head, and rear it in the place your father's stands.
and now to london with triumphant march, there to be crowned england' from whence shall warwick cut the sea to france, so shalt thou sinew both these lands together and, having france thy friend, thou shalt not dread the scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again for though they cannot greatly sting to hurt, yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
first will i see the coronation and then to brittany i'll cross the sea, to effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
even as thou wilt, sweet warwick, let it be for in thy shoulder do i build my seat, and never will i undertake the thing wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
richard, i will create thee duke of gloucester, and george, warwick, as ourself, shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
let me be duke of clarence, george of gloucester for gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
tut, that' richard, be duke of gloucester.
now to london, to see these honours in possession.
3 king henry vi under this thickgrown brake we'll shroud ourselves for through this laund anon the deer will come and in this covert will we make our stand, culling the principal of all the deer.
i'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
that cannot be the noise of thy crossbow will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
here stand we both, and, for the time shall not seem tedious, i'll tell thee what befell me on a day in this selfplace where now we mean to stand.
here comes a man let's stay till he be past.
from scotland am i stol'n, even of pure love, to greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
no, harry, harry, 'tis no land of thine thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee, thy balm wash' no bending knee will call thee caesar now, no humble suitors press to speak for right, no, not a man comes for redress of thee for how can i help them, and not myself?
ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper' this is the quondam king let's seize upon him.
let me embrace thee, sour adversity, for wise men say it is the wisest course.
why linger we?
let us lay hands upon him.
forbear awhile we'll hear a little more.
my queen and son are gone to france for aid and, as i hear, the great commanding warwick is thither gone, to crave the french king's sister if this news be true, poor queen and son, your labour is but lost for warwick is a subtle orator, and lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
by this account then margaret may win him for she' her sighs will make a battery in his breast her tears will pierce into a marble heart the tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn and nero will be tainted with remorse, to hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
ay, but she's come to beg, warwick to give she, on his left side, craving aid for henry, he, on his right, asking a wife for edward.
she weeps, and says her henry is deposed he smiles, and says his edward is install'd that she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more whiles warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong, inferreth arguments of mighty strength, and in conclusion wins the king from her, with promise of his sister, and what else, to strengthen and support king edward's place.
o margaret, thus 'twill be and thou, poor soul, art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!
say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
more than i seem, a man at least, for less i should not be and men may talk of kings, and why not i?
ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
why, so i am, in mind and that's enough.
but, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
my crown is in my heart, not on my head not decked with diamonds and indian stones, a crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
well, if you be a king crown'd with content, your crown content and you must be contented to go along with us for as we think, you are the king king edward hath deposed and we his subjects sworn in all allegiance will apprehend you as his enemy.
but did you never swear, and break an oath?
no, never such an oath nor will not now.
where did you dwell when i was king of england?
here in this country, where we now remain.
i was anointed king at nine months old my father and my grandfather were kings, and tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
no for we were subjects but while you were king.
why, am i dead?
do i not breathe a man?
ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
look, as i blow this feather from my face, and as the air blows it to me again, obeying with my wind when i do blow, and yielding to another when it blows, commanded always by the greater gust such is the lightness of you common men.
but do not break your oaths for of that sin my mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
go where you will, the king shall be commanded and be you kings, command, and i'll obey.
we are true subjects to the king, king edward.
so would you be again to henry, if he were seated as king edward is.
we charge you, in god's name, and the king's, to go with us unto the officers.
in god's name, lead your king's name be obey' and what god will, that let your king perform and what he will, i humbly yield unto.
3 king henry vi brother of gloucester, at saint alban's field this lady's husband, sir richard grey, was slain, her suit is now to repossess those lands which we in justice cannot well deny, because in quarrel of the house of york the worthy gentleman did lose his life.
your highness shall do well to grant her suit it were dishonour to deny it her.
it were no less but yet i'll make a pause.
widow, we will consider of your suit and come some other time to know our mind.
right gracious lord, may it please your highness to resolve me now and what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.
how many children hast thou, widow?
tell me.
three, my most gracious lord.
'twere pity they should lose their father's lands.
be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
lords, i'll try this widow's wit.
now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
ay, full as dearly as i love myself.
and would you not do much to do them good?
to do them good, i would sustain some harm.
then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
therefore i came unto your majesty.
i'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
so shall you bind me to your highness' service.
what service wilt thou do me, if i give them?
what you command, that rests in me to do.
but you will take exceptions to my boon.
no, gracious lord, except i cannot do it.
ay, but thou canst do what i mean to ask.
why, then i will do what your grace commands.
why stops my lord, shall i not hear my task?
an easy task 'tis but to love a king.
that's soon perform'd, because i am a subject.
why, then, thy husband's lands i freely give thee.
i take my leave with many thousand thanks.
but stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love i mean.
the fruits of love i mean, my loving liege.
ay, but, i fear me, in another sense.
what love, think'st thou, i sue so much to get?
my love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers that love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
no, by my troth, i did not mean such love.
why, then you mean not as i thought you did.
but now you partly may perceive my mind.
my mind will never grant what i perceive your highness aims at, if i aim aright.
to tell thee plain, i aim to lie with thee.
to tell you plain, i had rather lie in prison.
why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
why, then mine honesty shall be my dower for by that loss i will not purchase them.
therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
but, mighty lord, this merry inclination please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.
' ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request no if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.
then, no, my lord.
my suit is at an end.
'tis better said than done, i am a subject fit to jest withal, but far unfit to be a sovereign.
sweet widow, by my state i swear to thee i speak no more than what my soul intends and that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
i know i am too mean to be your queen, and yet too good to be your concubine.
you cavil, i did mean, my queen.
'twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.
no more than when my daughters call thee mother.
thou art a widow, and thou hast some children and, by god's mother, i, being but a bachelor, why, 'tis a happy thing to be the father unto many sons.
answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
the widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
you'll think it strange if i should marry her.
to whom, my lord?
why, clarence, to myself.
that would be ten days' wonder at the least.
that's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
by so much is the wonder in extremes.
well, jest on, i can tell you both her suit is granted for her husband's lands.
my gracious lord, henry your foe is taken, and brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
see that he be convey' and go we, brothers, to the man that took him, to question of his apprehension.
widow, go you along.
lords, use her honourably.
ay, edward will use women honourably.
would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all, that from his loins no hopeful branch may spring, to cross me from the golden time i look for!
and yet, between my soul's desire and me the lustful edward's title buried is clarence, henry, and his son young edward, and all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies, to take their rooms, a cold premeditation for my purpose!
why, then, i do but dream on sovereignty like one that stands upon a promontory, and spies a faroff shore where he would tread, wishing his foot were equal with his eye, and chides the sea that sunders him from thence, saying, he' so do i wish the crown, being so far off and so i chide the means that keeps me from it and so i say, i'll cut the causes off, flattering me with impossibilities.
my eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much, unless my hand and strength could equal them.
well, say there is no kingdom then for richard what other pleasure can the world afford?
i'll make my heaven in a lady's lap, and deck my body in gay ornaments, and witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
o miserable thought!
and more unlikely than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
why, love forswore me in my mother' and, for i should not deal in her soft laws, she did corrupt frail nature with some bribe, to shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub to make an envious mountain on my back, where sits deformity to mock my body to shape my legs of an unequal size to disproportion me in every part, like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bearwhelp that carries no impression like the dam.
and am i then a man to be beloved?
o monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
then, since this earth affords no joy to me, but to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such as are of better person than myself, i'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown, and, whiles i live, to account this world but hell, until my misshaped trunk that bears this head be round impaled with a glorious crown.
and yet i know not how to get the crown, and i,like one lost in a thorny wood, that rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns, seeking a way and straying from the way not knowing how to find the open air, but toiling desperately to find it out, and from that torment i will free myself, or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
why, i can smile, and murder whiles i smile, and cry 'content' to that which grieves my heart, and wet my cheeks with artificial tears, and frame my face to all occasions.
i'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall i'll slay more gazers than the basilisk i'll play the orator as well as nestor, deceive more slily than ulysses could, and, like a sinon, take another troy.
i can add colours to the chameleon, change shapes with proteus for advantages, and set the murderous machiavel to school.
can i do this, and cannot get a crown?
tut, were it farther off, i'll pluck it down.
3 king henry vi fair queen of england, worthy margaret, it ill befits thy state and birth, that thou shouldst stand while lewis doth sit.
no, now margaret must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve where kings command.
i was, i must confess, great albion' but now mischance hath trod my title down, and with dishonour laid me on the ground where i must take like seat unto my fortune, and to my humble seat conform myself.
why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?
from such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears and stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself, yield not thy neck to fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind still ride in triumph over all mischance.
be plain, queen margaret, and tell thy grief it shall be eased, if france can yield relief.
those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts and give my tonguetied sorrows leave to speak.
now, therefore, be it known to noble lewis, that henry, sole possessor of my love, is of a king become a banish'd man, and forced to live in scotland a forlorn while proud ambitious edward duke of york usurps the regal title and the seat of england's trueanointed lawful king.
this is the cause that i, poor margaret, with this my son, prince edward, henry's heir, am come to crave thy just and lawful aid and if thou fail us, scotland hath will to help, but cannot help our people and our peers are both misled, our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight, and, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
renowned queen, with patience calm the storm, while we bethink a means to break it off.
the more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
the more i stay, the more i'll succor thee.
o, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
and see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
what's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
our earl of warwick, edward's greatest friend.
welcome, brave warwick!
what brings thee to france?
ay, now begins a second storm to rise for this is he that moves both wind and tide.
from worthy edward, king of albion, my lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend, i come, in kindness and unfeigned love, first, to do greetings to thy royal person and then to crave a league of amity and lastly, to confirm that amity with a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant that virtuous lady bona, thy fair sister, to england's king in lawful marriage.
king lewis and lady bona, hear me speak, before you answer warwick.
his demand springs not from edward's wellmeant honest love, but from deceit bred by necessity for how can tyrants safely govern home, unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
to prove him tyrant this reason may suffice, but were he dead, yet here prince edward stands, king henry's son.
look, therefore, lewis, that by this league and marriage thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour for though usurpers sway the rule awhile, yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
injurious margaret!
and why not queen?
because thy father henry did usurp and thou no more are prince than she is queen.
then warwick disannuls great john of gaunt, which did subdue the greatest part of spain and, after john of gaunt, henry the fourth, whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest and, after that wise prince, henry the fifth, from these our henry lineally descends.
oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse, you told not how henry the sixth hath lost all that which henry fifth had gotten?
methinks these peers of france should smile at that.
but for the rest, you tell a pedigree of threescore and two years a silly time to make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
why, warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege, whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years, and not bewray thy treason with a blush?
can oxford, that did ever fence the right, now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
for shame!
leave henry, and call edward king.
call him my king by whose injurious doom my elder brother, the lord aubrey vere, was done to death?
and more than so, my father, even in the downfall of his mellow'd years, when nature brought him to the door of death?
no, warwick, no while life upholds this arm, this arm upholds the house of lancaster.
and i the house of york.
queen margaret, prince edward, and oxford, vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside, while i use further conference with warwick.
heavens grant that warwick's words bewitch him not!
now warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience, is edward your true king?
for i were loath to link with him that were not lawful chosen.
thereon i pawn my credit and mine honour.
but is he gracious in the people's eye?
the more that henry was unfortunate.
then further, all dissembling set aside, tell me for truth the measure of his love unto our sister bona.
such it seems as may beseem a monarch like himself.
myself have often heard him say and swear that this his love was an eternal plant, whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground, the leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun, exempt from envy, but not from disdain, unless the lady bona quit his pain.
now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
your grant, or your denial, yet i confess that often ere this day, when i have heard your king's desert recounted, mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
then, warwick, our sister shall be edward's and now forthwith shall articles be drawn touching the jointure that your king must make, which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
draw near, queen margaret, and be a witness that bona shall be wife to the english king.
to edward, but not to the english king.
deceitful warwick!
it was thy device before thy coming lewis was henry's friend.
but if your title to the crown be weak, as may appear by edward's good success, then 'tis but reason that i be released from giving aid which late i promised.
yet shall you have all kindness at my hand that your estate requires and mine can yield.
henry now lives in scotland at his ease, where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
and as for you yourself, our quondam queen, you have a father able to maintain you and better 'twere you troubled him than france.
peace, impudent and shameless warwick, peace, proud setter up and puller down of kings!
i will not hence, till, with my talk and tears, both full of truth, i make king lewis behold thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love for both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
i like it well that our fair queen and mistress smiles at her news, while warwick frowns at his.
nay, mark how lewis stamps, i hope all's for the best.
warwick, what are thy news?
and yours, fair queen?
mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
what!
has your king married the lady grey!
and now, to soothe your forgery and his, sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
is this the alliance that he seeks with france?
dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
this proveth edward's love and warwick's honesty.
king lewis, i here protest, in sight of heaven, and by the hope i have of heavenly bliss, that i am clear from this misdeed of edward's, no more my king, for he dishonours me, but most himself, if he could see his shame.
did i forget that by the house of york my father came untimely to his death?
did i let pass the abuse done to my niece?
did i impale him with the regal crown?
did i put henry from his native right?
and am i guerdon'd at the last with shame?
shame on himself!
and to repair my honour lost for him, i here renounce him and return to henry.
my noble queen, let former grudges pass, i will revenge his wrong to lady bona, and replant henry in his former state.
warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love and i forgive and quite forget old faults, and joy that thou becomest king henry's friend.
so much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend, that, if king lewis vouchsafe to furnish us with some few bands of chosen soldiers, i'll undertake to land them on our coast and force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'tis not his new and as for clarence, as my letters tell me, he's very likely now to fall from him, for matching more for wanton lust than honour, or than for strength and safety of our country.
dear brother, how shall bona be revenged but by thy help to this distressed queen?
renowned prince, how shall poor henry live, unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
my quarrel and this english queen's are one.
and mine, fair lady bona, joins with yours.
and mine with hers, and thine, and margaret's.
therefore at last i firmly am resolved you shall have aid.
let me give humble thanks for all at once.
then, england's messenger, return in post, and tell false edward, thy supposed king, that lewis of france is sending over masquers thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.
tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, i'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside, and i am ready to put armour on.
tell him from me that he hath done me wrong, and therefore i'll uncrown him ere't be long.
there' be gone.
but, warwick, thou and oxford, with five thousand men, shall cross the seas, and bid false edward battle and, as occasion serves, this noble queen and prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt, what pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
this shall assure my constant loyalty, that if our queen and this young prince agree, i'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy to him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
yes, i agree, and thank you for your motion.
son edward, she is fair and virtuous, therefore delay not, give thy hand to warwick and, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable, that only warwick's daughter shall be thine.
yes, i accept her, for she well deserves it and here, to pledge my vow, i give my hand.
why stay we now?
these soldiers shall be levied, and thou, lord bourbon, our high admiral, shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
i long till edward fall by war's mischance, for mocking marriage with a dame of france.
i came from edward as ambassador, matter of marriage was the charge he gave me, but dreadful war shall answer his demand.
had he none else to make a stale but me?
then none but i shall turn his jest to sorrow.
i was the chief that raised him to the crown, and i' not that i pity henry's misery, but seek revenge on edward's mockery.
3 king henry vi now tell me, brother clarence, what think you of this new marriage with the lady grey?
hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to france how could he stay till warwick made return?
my lords, forbear this talk here comes the king.
and his wellchosen bride.
i mind to tell him plainly what i think.
now, brother of clarence, how like you our choice, that you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
as well as lewis of france, or the earl of warwick, which are so weak of courage and in judgment that they'll take no offence at our abuse.
suppose they take offence without a cause, i am edward, your king and warwick's, and must have my will.
and shall have your will, yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
yea, brother richard, are you offended too?
no, god forbid that i should wish them sever'd whom god hath join'd together ay, and 'twere pity to sunder them that yoke so well together.
setting your scorns and your mislike aside, tell me some reason why the lady grey should not become my wife and england's queen.
and you too, somerset and montague, speak freely what you think.
that king lewis becomes your enemy, for mocking him about the marriage of the lady bona.
and warwick, doing what you gave in charge, is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
what if both lewis and warwick be appeased by such invention as i can devise?
yet, to have join'd with france in such alliance would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth 'gainst foreign storms than any homebred marriage.
why, knows not montague that of itself england is safe, if true within itself?
but the safer when 'tis back'd with france.
' let us be back'd with god and with the seas which he hath given for fence impregnable, and with their helps only defend ourselves in them and in ourselves our safety lies.
for this one speech lord hastings well deserves to have the heir of the lord hungerford.
ay, what of that?
it was my will and grant and for this once my will shall stand for law.
and yet methinks your grace hath not done well, to give the heir and daughter of lord scales unto the brother of your loving bride but in your bride you bury brotherhood.
or else you would not have bestow'd the heir of the lord bonville on your new wife's son, and leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
alas, poor clarence!
is it for a wife that thou art malcontent?
i will provide thee.
in choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment, which being shallow, you give me leave to play the broker in mine own behalf and to that end i shortly mind to leave you.
leave me, or tarry, edward will be king, and not be tied unto his brother's will.
my lords, before it pleased his majesty to raise my state to title of a queen, do me but right, and you must all confess that i was not ignoble of descent and meaner than myself have had like fortune.
but as this title honours me and mine, so your dislike, to whom i would be pleasing, doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
my love, what danger or what sorrow can befall thee, so long as edward is thy constant friend, and their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too, unless they seek for hatred at my hands which if they do, yet will i keep thee safe, and they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
now, messenger, what letters or what news from france?
my sovereign liege, no letters and few words, but such as i, without your special pardon, dare not relate.
go to, therefore, in brief, tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
what answer makes king lewis unto our letters?
at my depart, 'go tell false edward, thy supposed king, that lewis of france is sending over masquers to revel it with him and his new bride.
' is lewis so brave?
belike he thinks me henry.
but what said lady bona to my marriage?
these were her words, utter' 'tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, i'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
' i blame not her, she could say little less she had the wrong.
but what said henry's queen?
for i have heard that she was there in place.
'tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done, and i am ready to put armour on.
' belike she minds to play the amazon.
but what said warwick to these injuries?
he, more incensed against your majesty than all the rest, 'tell him from me that he hath done me wrong, and therefore i'll uncrown him ere't be long.
' ha!
durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
well i will arm me, being thus forewarn' they shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
but say, is warwick friends with margaret?
ay, gracious sovereign they are so link'd in friendship that young prince edward marries warwick's daughter.
belike the elder clarence will have the younger.
now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast, for i will hence to warwick's other daughter that, though i want a kingdom, yet in marriage i may not prove inferior to yourself.
you that love me and warwick, follow me.
clarence and somerset both gone to warwick!
yet am i arm'd against the worst can happen and haste is needful in this desperate case.
pembroke and stafford, you in our behalf go levy men, and make prepare for war they are already, myself in person will straight follow you.
but, ere i go, hastings and montague, resolve my doubt.
you twain, of all the rest, tell me if you love warwick more than me?
if it be so, then both depart to him but if you mind to hold your true obedience, give me assurance with some friendly vow, that i may never have you in suspect.
so god help montague as he proves true!
and hastings as he favours edward's cause!
now, brother richard, will you stand by us?
ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
why, so!
then am i sure of victory.
now therefore let us hence and lose no hour, till we meet warwick with his foreign power.
3 king henry vi trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well the common people by numbers swarm to us.
but see where somerset and clarence come!
speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
fear not that, my lord.
then, gentle clarence, welcome unto warwick and welcome, i hold it cowardice to rest mistrustful where a noble heart hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love else might i think that clarence, edward's brother, but welcome, sweet clarence my daughter shall be thine.
and now what rests but, in night's coverture, thy brother being carelessly encamp'd, his soldiers lurking in the towns about, and but attended by a simple guard, we may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
that as ulysses and stout diomede with sleight and manhood stole to rhesus' tents, and brought from thence the thracian fatal steeds, so we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle, at unawares may beat down edward's guard and seize himself i say not, slaughter him, for i intend but only to surprise him.
you that will follow me to this attempt, applaud the name of henry with your leader.
why, then, let' for warwick and his friends, god and saint george!
3 king henry vi come on, my masters, the king by this is set him down to sleep.
what, will he not to bed?
why, no for he hath made a solemn vow never to lie and take his natural rest till warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
tomorrow then belike shall be the day, if warwick be so near as men report.
but say, i pray, what nobleman is that that with the king here resteth in his tent?
'tis the lord hastings, the king's chiefest friend.
o, is it so?
but why commands the king that his chief followers lodge in towns about him, while he himself keeps in the cold field?
'tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
ay, but give me worship and quietness i like it better than a dangerous honour.
if warwick knew in what estate he stands, 'tis to be doubted he would waken him.
unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent, but to defend his person from nightfoes?
this is his tent and see where stand his guard.
courage, my masters!
honour now or never!
but follow me, and edward shall be ours.
who goes there?
stay, or thou diest!
what are they that fly there?
let them go here is the duke.
the duke!
why, warwick, when we parted, thou call'dst me king.
ay, but the case is alter' when you disgraced me in my embassade, then i degraded you from being king, and come now to create you duke of york.
alas!
how should you govern any kingdom, that know not how to use ambassadors, nor how to be contented with one wife, nor how to use your brothers brotherly, nor how to study for the people's welfare, nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
yea, brother of clarence, are thou here too?
nay, then i see that edward needs must down.
yet, warwick, in despite of all mischance, of thee thyself and all thy complices, though fortune's malice overthrow my state, my mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
then, for his mind, be edward england' but henry now shall wear the english crown, and be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
my lord of somerset, at my request, see that forthwith duke edward be convey'd unto my brother, archbishop of york.
when i have fought with pembroke and his fellows, i'll follow you, and tell what answer lewis and the lady bona send to him.
now, for a while farewell, good duke of york.
what fates impose, that men must needs abide it boots not to resist both wind and tide.
what now remains, my lords, for us to do but march to london with our soldiers?
ay, that's the first thing that we have to do to free king henry from imprisonment and see him seated in the regal throne.
3 king henry vi madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
why brother rivers, are you yet to learn what late misfortune is befall'n king edward?
what!
loss of some pitch'd battle against warwick?
no, but the loss of his own royal person.
then is my sovereign slain?
ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner, either betray'd by falsehood of his guard and, as i further have to understand, is new committed to the bishop of york, fell warwick's brother and by that our foe.
these news i must confess are full of grief yet, gracious madam, warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.
till then fair hope must hinder life's decay.
and i the rather wean me from despair for love of edward' this is it that makes me bridle passion and bear with mildness my misfortune's cross ay, ay, for this i draw in many a tear and stop the rising of bloodsucking sighs, lest with my sighs or tears i blast or drown king edward's fruit, true heir to the english crown.
but, madam, where is warwick then become?
i am inform'd that he comes towards london, to set the crown once more on henry' guess thou the rest king edward's friends must down, but, to prevent the tyrant's violence, for trust not him that hath once broken faith, i'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary, to save at least the heir of edward' there shall i rest secure from force and fraud.
come, therefore, if warwick take us we are sure to die.
3 king henry vi now, my lord hastings and sir william stanley, leave off to wonder why i drew you hither, into this chiefest thicket of the park.
you know our king, my brother, is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands he hath good usage and great liberty, and, often but attended with weak guard, comes hunting this way to disport himself.
i have advertised him by secret means that if about this hour he make his way under the colour of his usual game, he shall here find his friends with horse and men to set him free from his captivity.
this way, my lord for this way lies the game.
nay, this way, see where the huntsmen stand.
now, brother of gloucester, lord hastings, and the rest, stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?
brother, your horse stands ready at the parkcorner.
but whither shall we then?
to lynn, my lord, and ship from thence to flanders.
well guess'd, believe me for that was my meaning.
stanley, i will requite thy forwardness.
but wherefore stay we?
'tis no time to talk.
huntsman, what say'st thou?
wilt thou go along?
better do so than tarry and be hang'd.
come then, away let's ha' no more ado.
bishop, shield thee from warwick's frown and pray that i may repossess the crown.
3 king henry vi master lieutenant, now that god and friends have shaken edward from the regal seat, and turn'd my captive state to liberty, my fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys, at our enlargement what are thy due fees?
subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns but if an humble prayer may prevail, i then crave pardon of your majesty.
for what, lieutenant?
for well using me?
nay, be thou sure i'll well requite thy kindness, for that it made my imprisonment a pleasure ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds conceive when after many moody thoughts at last by notes of household harmony they quite forget their loss of liberty.
but, warwick, after god, thou set'st me free, and chiefly therefore i thank god and thee he was the author, thou the instrument.
therefore, that i may conquer fortune's spite by living low, where fortune cannot hurt me, and that the people of this blessed land may not be punish'd with my thwarting stars, warwick, although my head still wear the crown, i here resign my government to thee, for thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
your grace hath still been famed for virtuous and now may seem as wise as virtuous, by spying and avoiding fortune's malice, yet in this one thing let me blame your grace, for choosing me when clarence is in place.
no, warwick, thou art worthy of the sway, to whom the heavens in thy nativity adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown, as likely to be blest in peace and war and therefore i yield thee my free consent.
and i choose clarence only for protector.
now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts, i make you both protectors of this land, while i myself will lead a private life and in devotion spend my latter days, to sin's rebuke and my creator's praise.
what answers clarence to his sovereign's will?
that he consents, if warwick yield consent for on thy fortune i repose myself.
why, then, though loath, we'll yoke together, like a double shadow to henry's body, and supply his place i mean, in bearing weight of government, while he enjoys the honour and his ease.
and, clarence, now then it is more than needful forthwith that edward be pronounced a traitor, and all his lands and goods be confiscate.
what else?
and that succession be determined.
ay, therein clarence shall not want his part.
but, with the first of all your chief affairs, let me entreat, for i command no more, that margaret your queen and my son edward be sent for, to return from france with speed for, till i see them here, by doubtful fear my joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
it shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
my lord of somerset, what youth is that, of whom you seem to have so tender care?
my liege, it is young henry, earl of richmond.
come hither, england's hope.
if secret powers suggest but truth to my divining thoughts, this pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
his looks are full of peaceful majesty, his head by nature framed to wear a crown, his hand to wield a sceptre, and himself likely in time to bless a regal throne.
make much of him, my lords, for this is he must help you more than you are hurt by me.
what news, my friend?
that edward is escaped from your brother, and fled, as he hears since, to burgundy.
unsavoury news!
but how made he escape?
he was convey'd by richard duke of gloucester and the lord hastings, who attended him in secret ambush on the forest side and from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him for hunting was his daily exercise.
my brother was too careless of his charge.
but let us hence, my sovereign, to provide a salve for any sore that may betide.
my lord, i like not of this flight of edward's for doubtless burgundy will yield him help, and we shall have more wars before 't be long.
as henry's late presaging prophecy did glad my heart with hope of this young richmond, so doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts what may befall him, therefore, lord oxford, to prevent the worst, forthwith we'll send him hence to brittany, till storms be past of civil enmity.
ay, for if edward repossess the crown, 'tis like that richmond with the rest shall down.
it shall be so he shall to brittany.
come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
3 king henry vi now, brother richard, lord hastings, and the rest, yet thus far fortune maketh us amends, and says that once more i shall interchange my waned state for henry's regal crown.
well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas what then remains, we being thus arrived from ravenspurgh haven before the gates of york, but that we enter, as into our dukedom?
the gates made fast!
brother, i like not this for many men that stumble at the threshold are well foretold that danger lurks within.
tush, man, by fair or foul means we must enter in, for hither will our friends repair to us.
my liege, i'll knock once more to summon them.
my lords, we were forewarned of your coming, and shut the gates for safety of ourselves for now we owe allegiance unto henry.
but, master mayor, if henry be your king, yet edward at the least is duke of york.
true, my good lord i know you for no less.
why, and i challenge nothing but my dukedom, as being well content with that alone.
why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
open the gates we are king henry's friends.
ay, say you so?
the gates shall then be open'd.
a wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
the good old man would fain that all were well, so 'twere not 'long of him but being enter'd, i doubt not, i, but we shall soon persuade both him and all his brothers unto reason.
so, these gates must not be shut but in the night or in the time of war.
what!
fear not, man, but yield me up the keys for edward will defend the town and thee, and all those friends that deign to follow me.
brother, this is sir john montgomery, our trusty friend, unless i be deceived.
welcome, sir john!
but why come you in arms?
to help king edward in his time of storm, as every loyal subject ought to do.
thanks, good montgomery but we now forget our title to the crown and only claim our dukedom till god please to send the rest.
then fare you well, i came to serve a king and not a duke.
drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
nay, stay, sir john, awhile, and we'll debate by what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
what talk you of debating?
in few words, if you'll not here proclaim yourself our king, i'll leave you to your fortune and be gone why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
when we grow stronger, then we' till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
away with scrupulous wit!
now arms must rule.
and fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
brother, the bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
then be it as you will for 'tis my right, and henry but usurps the diadem.
ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself and now will i be edward's champion.
sound trumpet edward shall be here proclaim' come, fellowsoldier, make thou proclamation.
edward the fourth, by the grace of god, king of england and france, and lord of ireland, c.
and whosoe'er gainsays king edward's right, by this i challenge him to single fight.
long live edward the fourth!
thanks, brave montgomery if fortune serve me, i'll requite this kindness.
now, for this night, let's harbour here in york and when the morning sun shall raise his car above the border of this horizon, we'll forward towards warwick and his mates for well i wot that henry is no soldier.
ah, froward clarence!
how evil it beseems thee to flatter henry and forsake thy brother!
yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and warwick.
come on, doubt not of the day, and, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
3 king henry vi what counsel, lords?
edward from belgia, with hasty germans and blunt hollanders, hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas, and with his troops doth march amain to london and many giddy people flock to him.
let's levy men, and beat him back again.
a little fire is quickly trodden out which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
in warwickshire i have truehearted friends, not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war and thou, son clarence, shalt stir up in suffolk, norfolk, and in kent, thou, brother montague, in buckingham, northampton and in leicestershire, shalt find men well inclined to hear what thou command' and thou, brave oxford, wondrous well beloved, in oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
my sovereign, with the loving citizens, like to his island girt in with the ocean, or modest dian circled with her nymphs, shall rest in london till we come to him.
fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
farewell, my sovereign.
farewell, my hector, and my troy's true hope.
in sign of truth, i kiss your highness' hand.
wellminded clarence, be thou fortunate!
comfort, my lord and so i take my leave.
and thus i seal my truth, and bid adieu.
sweet oxford, and my loving montague, and all at once, once more a happy farewell.
farewell, let's meet at coventry.
here at the palace i will rest awhile.
cousin of exeter, what thinks your lordship?
methinks the power that edward hath in field should not be able to encounter mine.
the doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
that's not my fear i have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands, nor posted off their suits with slow delays my pity hath been balm to heal their wounds, my mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs, my mercy dried their waterflowing tears i have not been desirous of their wealth, nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
nor forward of revenge, though they much err' then why should they love edward more than me?
no, exeter, and when the lion fawns upon the lamb, the lamb will never cease to follow him.
hark, hark, my lord!
what shouts are these?
seize on the shamefaced henry, bear him hence and once again proclaim us king of england.
now stops thy spring my sea shal suck them dry, and swell so much the higher by their ebb.
hence with him to the tower let him not speak.
and, lords, towards coventry bend we our course the sun shines hot and, if we use delay, cold biting winter mars our hopedfor hay.
away betimes, before his forces join, and take the great brave warriors, march amain towards coventry.
3 king henry vi where is the post that came from valiant oxford?
how far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
by this at dunsmore, marching hitherward.
how far off is our brother montague?
where is the post that came from montague?
by this at daintry, with a puissant troop.
say, somerville, what says my loving son?
and, by thy guess, how nigh is clarence now?
at southam i did leave him with his forces, and do expect him here some two hours hence.
then clarence is at hand, i hear his drum.
it is not his, my lord the drum your honour hears marcheth from warwick.
who should that be?
belike, unlook'dfor friends.
they are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
see how the surly warwick mans the wall!
o unbid spite!
is sportful edward come?
where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced, that we could hear no news of his repair?
now, warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates, speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee, call edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
and he shall pardon thee these outrages.
nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence, confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own, call warwick patron and be penitent?
and thou shalt still remain the duke of york.
i thought, at least, he would have said the king or did he make the jest against his will?
is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
ay, by my faith, i'll do thee service for so good a gift.
'twas i that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
why then 'tis mine, if but by warwick's gift.
and weakling, warwick takes his gift again and henry is my king, warwick his subject.
but warwick's king is edward' and, gallant warwick, what is the body when the head is off?
alas, that warwick had no more forecast, but, whiles he thought to steal the single ten, the king was slily finger'd from the deck!
you left poor henry at the bishop's palace, and, ten to one, you'll meet him in the tower.
'tis even so yet you are warwick still.
come, warwick, take the time kneel down, nay, when?
strike now, or else the iron cools.
i had rather chop this hand off at a blow, and with the other fling it at thy face, than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.
sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend, this hand, fast wound about thy coalblack hair shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off, write in the dust this sentence with thy blood, 'windchanging warwick now can change no more.
' o cheerful colours!
see where oxford comes!
oxford, oxford, for lancaster!
the gates are open, let us enter too.
so other foes may set upon our backs.
stand we in good array for they no doubt if not, the city being but of small defence, we'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
o, welcome, oxford!
for we want thy help.
montague, montague, for lancaster!
thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
the harder match'd, my mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
somerset, somerset, for lancaster!
two of thy name, both dukes of somerset, have sold their lives unto the house of york and thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.
and lo, where george of clarence sweeps along, of force enough to bid his brother battle with whom an upright zeal to right prevails more than the nature of a brother's love!
come, clarence, come thou wilt, if warwick call.
father of warwick, know you what this means?
look here, i throw my infamy at thee i will not ruinate my father's house, who gave his blood to lime the stones together, and set up lancaster.
why, trow'st thou, warwick, that clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural, to bend the fatal instruments of war against his brother and his lawful king?
to keep that oath were more impiety than jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
i am so sorry for my trespass made that, to deserve well at my brother's hands, i here proclaim myself thy mortal foe, with resolution, wheresoe'er i meet thee as i will meet thee, if thou stir abroad to plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
and so, proudhearted warwick, i defy thee, and to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
pardon me, edward, and, richard, do not frown upon my faults, for i will henceforth be no more unconstant.
now welcome more, and ten times more beloved, than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
welcome, good clarence this is brotherlike.
o passing traitor, perjured and unjust!
what, warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
alas, i am not coop'd here for defence!
i will away towards barnet presently, and bid thee battle, edward, if thou darest.
yes, warwick, edward dares, and leads the way.
lords, to the field saint george and victory!
3 king henry vi so, die thou, and die our fear for warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
now, montague, sit fast i seek for thee, that warwick's bones may keep thine company.
ah, who is nigh?
come to me, friend or foe, and tell me who is victor, york or warwick?
why ask i that?
my mangled body shows, my blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
that i must yield my body to the earth and, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge, whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle, under whose shade the ramping lion slept, whose topbranch overpeer'd jove's spreading tree and kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.
these eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil, have been as piercing as the midday sun, the wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood, were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres for who lived king, but i could dig his grave?
and who durst mine when warwick bent his brow?
lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
my parks, my walks, my manors that i had.
even now forsake me, and of all my lands is nothing left me but my body's length.
why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
and, live we how we can, yet die we must.
ah, warwick, warwick!
wert thou as we are.
we might recover all our loss again ah, could'st thou fly!
why, then i would not fly.
ah, montague, if thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
and with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
thou lovest me not for, brother, if thou didst, thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood that glues my lips and will not let me speak.
come quickly, montague, or i am dead.
ah, warwick!
montague hath breathed his last and to the latest gasp cried out for warwick, and said 'commend me to my valiant brother.
' and more he would have said, and more he spoke, which sounded like a clamour in a vault, that mought not be distinguished but at last i well might hear, delivered with a groan, 'o, farewell, warwick!
' sweet rest his soul!
fly, lords, and save yourselves for warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
3 king henry vi thus far our fortune keeps an upward course, and we are graced with wreaths of victory.
but, in the midst of this brightshining day, i spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud, that will encounter with our glorious sun, i mean, my lords, those powers that the queen hath raised in gallia have arrived our coast and, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
a little gale will soon disperse that cloud the very beams will dry those vapours up, for every cloud engenders not a storm.
the queen is valued thirty thousand strong, and somerset, if she have time to breathe be well assured her faction will be full as strong as ours.
we are advertised by our loving friends we, having now the best at barnet field, will thither straight, for willingness rids way and, as we march, our strength will be augmented in every county as we go along.
strike up the drum cry 'courage!
' and away.
3 king henry vi great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss, but cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
what though the mast be now blown overboard, the cable broke, the holdinganchor lost, and half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
yet lives our pilot still.
is't meet that he should leave the helm and like a fearful lad with tearful eyes add water to the sea and give more strength to that which hath too much, whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock, which industry and courage might have saved?
ah, what a shame!
ah, what a fault were this!
say warwick was our anchor what of that?
and montague our topmost what of him?
our slaughter'd friends the tackles what of these?
why, is not oxford here another anchor?
and somerset another goodly mast?
the friends of france our shrouds and tacklings?
and, though unskilful, why not ned and i for once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
we will not from the helm to sit and weep, but keep our course, though the rough wind say no, from shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
as good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
and what is edward but ruthless sea?
what clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
and richard but a ragged fatal rock?
all these the enemies to our poor bark.
say you can swim alas, 'tis but a while!
tread on the sand why, bestride the rock the tide will wash you off, or else you famish that's a threefold death.
this speak i, lords, to let you understand, if case some one of you would fly from us, that there's no hopedfor mercy with the brothers more than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
why, courage then!
what cannot be avoided 'twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
methinks a woman of this valiant spirit should, if a coward heard her speak these words, infuse his breast with magnanimity and make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
i speak not this as doubting any here for did i but suspect a fearful man he should have leave to go away betimes, lest in our need he might infect another and make him of like spirit to himself.
if any such be hereas god forbid!
let him depart before we need his help.
women and children of so high a courage, and warriors faint!
why, 'twere perpetual shame.
o brave young prince!
thy famous grandfather long mayst thou live to bear his image and renew his glories!
and he that will not fight for such a hope.
go home to bed, and like the owl by day, if he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.
thanks, gentle somerset sweet oxford, thanks.
and take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
prepare you, lords, for edward is at hand.
ready to fight therefore be resolute.
it is his policy to haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.
but he's deceived we are in readiness.
this cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
here pitch our battle hence we will not budge.
brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood, which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength, must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
i need not add more fuel to your fire, for well i wot ye blaze to burn them out give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
lords, knights, and gentlemen, what i should say my tears gainsay for every word i speak, ye see, i drink the water of mine eyes.
therefore, henry, your sovereign, is prisoner to the foe his state usurp'd, his realm a slaughterhouse, his subjects slain, his statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent and yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
then, in god's name, lords, be valiant and give signal to the fight.
3 king henry vi now here a period of tumultuous broils.
for somerset, off with his guilty head.
go, bear them hence i will not hear them speak.
for my part, i'll not trouble thee with words.
nor i, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
so part we sadly in this troublous world, to meet with joy in sweet jerusalem.
is proclamation made, that who finds edward shall have a high reward, and he his life?
and lo, where youthful edward comes!
bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
what!
can so young a thorn begin to prick?
edward, what satisfaction canst thou make for bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects, and all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
speak like a subject, proud ambitious york!
suppose that i am now my father's mouth resign thy chair, and where i stand kneel thou, whilst i propose the selfsame words to thee, which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
that you might still have worn the petticoat, and ne'er have stol'n the breech from lancaster.
let aesop fable in a winter's night his currish riddles sort not with this place.
by heaven, brat, i'll plague ye for that word.
ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
for god's sake, take away this captive scold.
nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
peace, wilful boy, or i will charm your tongue.
untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
i know my duty lascivious edward, and thou perjured george, and thou misshapen dick, i tell ye all i am your better, and thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
take that, thou likeness of this railer here.
sprawl'st thou?
take that, to end thy agony.
and there's for twitting me with perjury.
o, kill me too!
marry, and shall.
hold, richard, hold for we have done too much.
why should she live, to fill the world with words?
what, doth she swoon?
use means for her recovery.
clarence, excuse me to the king my brother i' ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
what?
what?
the tower, the tower.
o ned, sweet ned!
speak to thy mother, boy!
canst thou not speak?
o traitors!
murderers!
they that stabb'd caesar shed no blood at all, did not offend, nor were not worthy blame, he was a man this, in respect, and men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
what's worse than murderer, that i may name it?
no, no, my heart will burst, and i will speak, that so my heart may burst.
butchers and villains!
bloody cannibals!
how sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
you have no children, butchers!
if you had, the thought of them would have stirr' but if you ever chance to have a child, look in his youth to have him so cut off as, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
away with her go, bear her hence perforce.
nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here, here sheathe thy sword, i' what, wilt thou not?
then, clarence, do it thou.
by heaven, i will not do thee so much ease.
good clarence, do sweet clarence, do thou do it.
didst thou not hear me swear i would not do it?
ay, 'twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
what, wilt thou not?
where is that devil's butcher, hardfavour'd richard?
richard, where art thou?
murder is thy almsdeed petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.
away, i say i charge ye, bear her hence.
so come to you and yours, as to this prince!
where's richard gone?
to london, all in post and, as i guess, to make a bloody supper in the tower.
he's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
discharge the common sort with pay and thanks, and let's away to london by this, i hope, she hath a son for me.
3 king henry vi good day, my lord.
what, at your book so hard?
ay,my lord, i should say rather 'tis sin to flatter 'good' 'good gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike, and both preposterous therefore, not 'good lord.
' sirrah, we must confer.
so flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf so first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece and next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
what scene of death hath roscius now to act?
suspicion always haunts the guilty mind the thief doth fear each bush an officer.
the bird that hath been limed in a bush, with trembling wings misdoubteth every bush and i, the hapless male to one sweet bird, have now the fatal object in my eye where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.
why, what a peevish fool was that of crete, that taught his son the office of a fowl!
an yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
i, daedalus my poor boy, icarus thy father, minos, that denied our course the sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy thy brother edward, and thyself the sea whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
my breast can better brook thy dagger's point than can my ears that tragic history.
but wherefore dost thou come?
is't for my life?
think'st thou i am an executioner?
a persecutor, i am sure, if murdering innocents be executing, why, then thou art an executioner.
thy son i kill'd for his presumption.
hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume, thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
and thus i prophesy, that many a thousand, which now mistrust no parcel of my fear, and many an old man's sigh and many a widow's, and many an orphan's waterstanding eye men for their sons, wives for their husbands, and orphans for their parents timeless death shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
the owl shriek'd at thy birth,an evil sign the nightcrow cried, aboding luckless time dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees the raven rook'd her on the chimney's top, and chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
thy mother felt more than a mother's pain, and, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope, to wit, an indigested and deformed lump, not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born, and, if the rest be true which i have heard, thou camest i' die, for this amongst the rest, was i ordain'd.
ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
god forgive my sins, and pardon thee!
what, will the aspiring blood of lancaster sink in the ground?
i thought it would have mounted.
see how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
o, may such purple tears be alway shed from those that wish the downfall of our house!
if any spark of life be yet remaining, down, down to hell i, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
indeed, 'tis true that henry told me of for i have often heard my mother say had i not reason, think ye, to make haste, and seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
the midwife wonder'd and the women cried 'o, jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!
' and so i was which plainly signified that i should snarl and bite and play the dog.
then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
i have no brother, i am like no brother and this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine, be resident in men like one another i am myself alone.
clarence, beware thou keep' but i will sort a pitchy day for thee for i will buz abroad such prophecies that edward shall be fearful of his life, and then, to purge his fear, i'll be thy death.
clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest, counting myself but bad till i be best.
i'll throw thy body in another room and triumph, henry, in thy day of doom.
3 king henry vi once more we sit in england's royal throne, repurchased with the blood of enemies.
what valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn, have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
three dukes of somerset, threefold renown'd for hardy and undoubted champions two cliffords, as the father and the son, and two northumberlands two braver men ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound with them, the two brave bears, warwick and montague, that in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion and made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
thus have we swept suspicion from our seat and made our footstool of security.
come hither, bess, and let me kiss my boy.
young ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself have in our armours watch'd the winter's night, went all afoot in summer's scalding heat, that thou mightst repossess the crown in peace and of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
clarence and gloucester, love my lovely queen and kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
the duty that i owe unto your majesty i seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
thanks, noble clarence worthy brother, thanks.
and, that i love the tree from whence thou sprang'st, witness the loving kiss i give the fruit.
now am i seated as my soul delights, having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
what will your grace have done with margaret?
reignier, her father, to the king of france hath pawn'd the sicils and jerusalem, and hither have they sent it for her ransom.
away with her, and waft her hence to france.
and now what rests but that we spend the time with stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows, such as befits the pleasure of the court?
sound drums and trumpets!
farewell sour annoy!
for here, i hope, begins our lasting joy.
if you shall chance, camillo, to visit bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as i have said, great difference betwixt our bohemia and your sicilia.
i think, this coming summer, the king of sicilia means to pay bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be justified in our loves for indeed beseech you, verily, we cannot with such magnificencein so rarei know not what to say.
we will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.
you pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
believe me, i speak as my understanding instructs me and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
sicilia cannot show himself overkind to bohemia.
they were trained together in their childhoods and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now.
since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their society, their encounters, though not personal, have been royally attorneyed with interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies that they have seemed to be together, though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed winds.
the heavens continue their loves!
i think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it.
you have an unspeakable it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came into my note.
it is a gallant child one that indeed physics the subject, they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to see him a man.
would they else be content to die?
yes if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live.
if the king had no son, they would desire to live on crutches till he had one.
nine changes of the watery star hath been the shepherd's note since we have left our throne time as long again would be find up, my brother, with our thanks and yet we should, for perpetuity, and therefore, like a cipher, yet standing in rich place, i multiply with one 'we thank you' many thousands moe that go before it.
stay your thanks a while and pay them when you part.
sir, that's tomorrow.
i am question'd by my fears, of what may chance or breed upon our absence that may blow no sneaping winds at home, to make us say '' besides, i have stay'd to tire your royalty.
we are tougher, brother, than you can put us to't.
no longer stay.
one sevennight longer.
very sooth, tomorrow.
we'll part the time between's then and in that i'll no gainsaying.
press me not, beseech you, so.
there is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world, so it should now, were there necessity in your request, although 'twere needful i denied it.
my affairs which to hinder were in your love a whip to me my stay to save both, farewell, our brother.
tonguetied, our queen?
speak you.
i had thought, sir, to have held my peace until you have drawn oaths from him not to stay.
you, sir, charge him too coldly.
tell him, you are sure all in bohemia's well this satisfaction the bygone day proclaim' say this to him, he's beat from his best ward.
well said, hermione.
to tell, he longs to see his son, but let him say so then, and let him go but let him swear so, and he shall not stay, we'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
yet of your royal presence i'll adventure the borrow of a week.
when at bohemia you take my lord, i'll give him my commission to let him there a month behind the gest prefix'd for' yet, good deed, leontes, i love thee not a jar o' the clock behind what ladyshe her lord.
you'll stay?
no, madam.
nay, but you will?
i may not, verily.
verily!
you put me off with limber vows but i, though you would seek to unsphere the stars with oaths, should yet say 'sir, no going.
' verily, a lady's 'verily' 's as potent as a lord's.
will you go yet?
force me to keep you as a prisoner, not like a guest so you shall pay your fees when you depart, and save your thanks.
how say you?
my prisoner?
or my guest?
by your dread 'verily,' one of them you shall be.
your guest, then, to be your prisoner should import offending which is for me less easy to commit than you to punish.
not your gaoler, then, but your kind hostess.
come, i'll question you of my lord' you were pretty lordings then?
we were, fair queen, two lads that thought there was no more behind but such a day tomorrow as today, and to be boy eternal.
was not my lord the verier wag o' the two?
we were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun, what we changed was innocence for innocence we knew not the doctrine of illdoing, nor dream'd that any did.
had we pursued that life, and our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd with stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven boldly 'not guilty' the imposition clear'd hereditary ours.
by this we gather you have tripp'd since.
o my most sacred lady!
temptations have since then been born to's for in those unfledged days was my wife a girl your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes of my young playfellow.
grace to boot!
of this make no conclusion, lest you say yet go on the offences we have made you do we'll answer, if you first sinn'd with us and that with us you did continue fault and that you slipp'd not with any but with us.
is he won yet?
he'll stay my lord.
at my request he would not.
hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest to better purpose.
never?
never, but once.
what!
have i twice said well?
when was't before?
i prithee tell me cram's with praise, and make's one good deed dying tongueless slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
you may ride's with one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere with spur we beat an acre.
what was my first?
it has an elder sister, o, would her name were grace!
when?
nay, let me have't i long.
why, that was when three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death, ere i could make thee open thy white hand then didst thou utter 'i am yours for ever.
' 'tis grace indeed.
why, lo you now, the one for ever earn'd a royal husband the other for some while a friend.
ay, my good lord.
i' fecks!
why, that's my bawcock.
what, hast smutch'd thy nose?
they say it is a copy out of mine.
come, captain, we must be neat not neat, but cleanly, and yet the steer, the heifer and the calf are all call'd neat.
still virginalling upon his palm!
how now, you wanton calf!
art thou my calf?
yes, if you will, my lord.
thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that i have, yet they say we are almost as like as eggs women say so, that will say anything but were they false as o'erdyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false as dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes no bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true to say this boy were like me.
come, sir page, sweet villain!
most dear'st!
my collop!
can thy dam?
may't be?
affection!
thou dost make possible things not so held, communicatest with dreamshow can this be?
with what's unreal thou coactive art, and fellow' then 'tis very credent thou mayst cojoin with something and thou dost, and that beyond commission, and i find it, and that to the infection of my brains and hardening of my brows.
what means sicilia?
he something seems unsettled.
how, my lord!
what cheer?
how is't with you, best brother?
you look as if you held a brow of much distraction are you moved, my lord?
no, in good earnest.
how sometimes nature will betray its folly, its tenderness, and make itself a pastime to harder bosoms!
looking on the lines of my boy's face, methoughts i did recoil twentythree years, and saw myself unbreech'd, in my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled, lest it should bite its master, and so prove, as ornaments oft do, how like, methought, i then was to this kernel, this squash, this gentleman.
mine honest friend, will you take eggs for money?
no, my lord, i'll fight.
you will!
why, happy man be's dole!
my brother, are you so fond of your young prince as we do seem to be of ours?
if at home, sir, he's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter, now my sworn friend and then mine enemy, my parasite, my soldier, statesman, he makes a july's day short as december, and with his varying childness cures in me thoughts that would thick my blood.
so stands this squire we two will walk, my lord, and leave you to your graver steps.
hermione, how thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome next to thyself and my young rover, he's apparent to my heart.
if you would seek us, we are yours i' shall's attend you there?
you'll be found, be you beneath the sky.
i am angling now, though you perceive me not how i give line.
go to, go to!
how she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
and arms her with the boldness of a wife to her allowing husband!
gone already!
inchthick, kneedeep, o'er head and ears a fork'd one!
go, play, boy, thy mother plays, and i play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue contempt and clamour will be my knell.
go, play, boy, play.
there have been, or i am much deceived, cuckolds ere now and many a man there is, even at this present, now while i speak this, holds his wife by the arm, that little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence and his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by sir smile, nay, there's comfort in't whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd, as mine, against their will.
should all despair that have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind would hang themselves.
physic for't there is none it is a bawdy planet, that will strike where 'tis predominant and 'tis powerful, think it, from east, west, be it concluded, no barricado for a belly know't it will let in and out the enemy many thousand on's have the disease, and feel't not.
how now, boy!
i am like you, they say.
why that's some comfort.
what, camillo there?
ay, my good lord.
go play, mamillius thou'rt an honest man.
camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
when you cast out, it still came home.
didst note it?
made his business more material.
didst perceive it?
they're here with me already, whispering, rounding 'sicilia is a so' 'tis far gone, when i shall gust it last.
how came't, camillo, that he did stay?
at the good queen's entreaty.
at the queen's be' 'good' should be pertinent but, so it is, it is not.
was this taken by any understanding pate but thine?
for thy conceit is soaking, will draw in not noted, is't, but of the finer natures?
by some severals of headpiece extraordinary?
lower messes perchance are to this business purblind?
say.
business, my lord!
i think most understand bohemia stays here longer.
stays here longer.
ay, but why?
to satisfy your highness and the entreaties of our most gracious mistress.
satisfy!
the entreaties of your mistress!
satisfy!
let that suffice.
i have trusted thee, camillo, with all the nearest things to my heart, as well my chambercouncils, wherein, priestlike, thou hast cleansed my bosom, i from thee departed thy penitent reform' but we have been deceived in thy integrity, deceived in that which seems so.
be it forbid, my lord!
to bide upon't, thou art not honest, or, if thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward, which hoxes honesty behind, restraining from course required or else thou must be counted a servant grafted in my serious trust and therein negligent or else a fool that seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn, and takest it all for jest.
my gracious lord, i may be negligent, foolish and fearful in every one of these no man is free, but that his negligence, his folly, fear, among the infinite doings of the world, sometime puts forth.
in your affairs, my lord, if ever i were wilfulnegligent, it was my folly if industriously i play'd the fool, it was my negligence, not weighing well the end if ever fearful to do a thing, where i the issue doubted, where of the execution did cry out against the nonperformance, 'twas a fear these, my lord, are such allow'd infirmities that honesty is never free of.
but, beseech your grace, be plainer with me let me know my trespass if i then deny it, 'tis none of mine.
ha' not you seen, camillo, but that's past doubt, you have, or your eyeglass is thicker than a cuckold's horn,or heard, for to a vision so apparent rumour cannot be mute,or thought,for cogitation resides not in that man that does not think, my wife is slippery?
if thou wilt confess, or else be impudently negative, to have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say my wife's a hobbyhorse, deserves a name as rank as any flaxwench that puts to before her troth say't and justify't.
i would not be a standerby to hear my sovereign mistress clouded so, without 'shrew my heart, you never spoke what did become you less than this which to reiterate were sin as deep as that, though true.
is whispering nothing?
is leaning cheek to cheek?
is meeting noses?
kissing with inside lip?
stopping the career of laughing with a sigh?
a note infallible of breaking honestyhorsing foot on foot?
skulking in corners?
wishing clocks more swift?
hours, minutes?
noon, midnight?
and all eyes blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only, that would unseen be wicked?
is this nothing?
why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing the covering sky is nothing bohemia nothing my wife is nothing nor nothing have these nothings, if this be nothing.
good my lord, be cured of this diseased opinion, and betimes for 'tis most dangerous.
say it be, 'tis true.
no, no, my lord.
it is you lie, i say thou liest, camillo, and i hate thee, pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave, or else a hovering temporizer, that canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, were my wife's liver infected as her life, she would not live the running of one glass.
who does infect her?
why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging about his neck, who, if i had servants true about me, that bare eyes to see alike mine honour as their profits, their own particular thrifts, they would do that ay, and thou, his cupbearer,whom i from meaner form have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven, how i am galled,mightst bespice a cup, to give mine enemy a lasting wink which draught to me were cordial.
sir, my lord, i could do this, and that with no rash potion, but with a lingering dram that should not work but i cannot believe this crack to be in my dread mistress, so sovereignly being honourable.
i have loved thee, make that thy question, and go rot!
dost think i am so muddy, so unsettled, to appoint myself in this vexation, sully the purity and whiteness of my sheets, which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps, give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son, who i do think is mine and love as mine, without ripe moving to't?
would i do this?
could man so blench?
i must believe you, i do and will fetch off bohemia for't provided that, when he's removed, your highness will take again your queen as yours at first, even for your son's sake and thereby for sealing the injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms known and allied to yours.
thou dost advise me i'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
my lord, go then and with a countenance as clear as friendship wears at feasts, keep with bohemia and with your queen.
if from me he have wholesome beverage, account me not your servant.
do't and thou hast the one half of my heart do't not, thou split'st thine own.
i'll do't, my lord.
i will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
o miserable lady!
but, for me, what case stand i in?
i must be the poisoner of good polixenes and my ground to do't is the obedience to a master, one who in rebellion with himself will have all that are his so too.
to do this deed, promotion follows.
if i could find example of thousands that had struck anointed kings and flourish'd after, i'ld not do't but since nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, let villany itself forswear't.
i must to do't, or no, is certain to me a breakneck.
happy star, reign now!
here comes bohemia.
methinks my favour here begins to warp.
not speak?
good day, camillo.
hail, most royal sir!
what is the news i' the court?
none rare, my lord.
the king hath on him such a countenance as he had lost some province and a region even now i met him with customary compliment when he, wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling a lip of much contempt, speeds from me and so leaves me to consider what is breeding that changeth thus his manners.
i dare not know, my lord.
how!
dare not!
do not.
do you know, and dare not?
'tis thereabouts for, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
and cannot say, you dare not.
good camillo, your changed complexions are to me a mirror which shows me mine changed too for i must be a party in this alteration, finding myself thus alter'd with 't.
there is a sickness which puts some of us in distemper, but i cannot name the disease and it is caught of you that yet are well.
how!
caught of me!
i have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better by my regard, but kill'd none so.
camillo, as you are certainly a gentleman, thereto clerklike experienced, which no less adorns our gentry than our parents' noble names, in whose success we are gentle,i beseech you, if you know aught which does behove my knowledge thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not in ignorant concealment.
i may not answer.
a sickness caught of me, and yet i well!
i must be answer'd.
dost thou hear, camillo, i conjure thee, by all the parts of man which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least is not this suit of mine, that thou declare what incidency thou dost guess of harm is creeping toward me how far off, how near which way to be prevented, if to be if not, how best to bear it.
sir, i will tell you since i am charged in honour and by him therefore mark my counsel, which must be even as swiftly follow'd as i mean to utter it, or both yourself and me cry lost, and so good night!
on, good camillo.
i am appointed him to murder you.
by whom, camillo?
by the king.
for what?
he thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears, as he had seen't or been an instrument to vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen forbiddenly.
o, then my best blood turn to an infected jelly and my name be yoked with his that did betray the best!
turn then my freshest reputation to a savour that may strike the dullest nostril where i arrive, and my approach be shunn'd, nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection that e'er was heard or read!
swear his thought over by each particular star in heaven and by all their influences, you may as well forbid the sea for to obey the moon as or by oath remove or counsel shake the fabric of his folly, whose foundation is piled upon his faith and will continue the standing of his body.
how should this grow?
but i am sure 'tis safer to avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
if therefore you dare trust my honesty, that lies enclosed in this trunk which you shall bear along impawn'd, away tonight!
your followers i will whisper to the business, and will by twos and threes at several posterns clear them o' the city.
for myself, i'll put my fortunes to your service, which are here by this discovery lost.
be not uncertain for, by the honour of my parents, i have utter' which if you seek to prove, i dare not stand by nor shall you be safer than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon his execution sworn.
i saw his heart in 's face.
be pilot to me and thy places shall still neighbour mine.
my ships are ready and my people did expect my hence departure two days ago.
this jealousy as she's rare, must it be great, and as his person's mighty, must it be violent, and as he does conceive he is dishonour'd by a man which ever profess'd to him, why, his revenges must in that be made more bitter.
fear o' good expedition be my friend, and comfort the gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing of his illta'en suspicion!
come, camillo i will respect thee as a father if thou bear' let us avoid.
it is in mine authority to command please your highness to take the urgent hour.
come, sir, away.
he so troubles me, 'tis past enduring.
come, my gracious lord, shall i be your playfellow?
no, i'll none of you.
why, my sweet lord?
you'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if i were a baby still.
i love you better.
and why so, my lord?
not for because your brows are blacker yet black brows, they say, become some women best, so that there be not too much hair there, but in a semicircle or a halfmoon made with a pen.
who taught you this?
i learnt it out of women's faces.
pray now what colour are your eyebrows?
blue, my lord.
nay, that' i have seen a lady's nose that has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
hark ye we shall present our services to a fine new prince one of these days and then you'ld wanton with us, if we would have you.
she is spread of late good time encounter her!
what wisdom stirs amongst you?
come, sir, now pray you, sit by us, and tell 's a tale.
merry or sad shall't be?
as merry as you will.
a sad tale' i have one of sprites and goblins.
let's have that, good sir.
come on, come on, and do your best to fright me with your sprites you're powerful at it.
there was a man nay, come, sit down then on.
i will tell it softly yond crickets shall not hear it.
come on, then, and give't me in mine ear.
was he met there?
his train?
camillo with him?
behind the tuft of pines i met them never i eyed them even to their ships.
how blest am i in my just censure, in my true opinion!
alack, for lesser knowledge!
how accursed in being so blest!
there may be in the cup a spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart, and yet partake no venom, for his knowledge but if one present the abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known how he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides, with violent hefts.
i have drunk, and seen the spider.
camillo was his help in this, there is a plot against my life, my crown all' that false villain whom i employ'd was preemploy' he has discover'd my design, and i remain a pinch'd thing yea, a very trick for them to play at will.
how came the posterns so easily open?
by his great authority which often hath no less prevail'd than so on your command.
i know't too well.
though he does bear some signs of me, yet you have too much blood in him.
what is this?
sport?
bear the boy hence he shall not come about her away with him!
and let her sport herself with that she's big with for 'tis polixenes has made thee swell thus.
but i'ld say he had not, and i'll be sworn you would believe my saying, howe'er you lean to the nayward.
you, my lords, look on her, mark her well be but about to say 'she is a goodly lady,' and the justice of your bearts will thereto add 'tis pity she's not honest,' praise her but for this her withoutdoor form, which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight the shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands that calumny doth useo, i am out that mercy does, for calumny will sear these shrugs, these hums and ha's, when you have said 'she's goodly,' come between ere you can say 'she'' but be 't known, from him that has most cause to grieve it should be, she's an adulteress.
should a villain say so, the most replenish'd villain in the world, you, my lord, do but mistake.
you have mistook, my lady, o thou thing!
which i'll not call a creature of thy place, lest barbarism, making me the precedent, should a like language use to all degrees and mannerly distinguishment leave out i have said she's an adulteress more, she's a traitor and camillo is a federary with her, and one that knows what she should shame to know herself but with her most vile principal, that she's a bedswerver, even as bad as those that vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy to this their late escape.
no, by my life.
privy to none of this.
how will this grieve you, when you shall come to clearer knowledge, that you thus have publish'd me!
gentle my lord, you scarce can right me throughly then to say you did mistake.
no if i mistake in those foundations which i build upon, the centre is not big enough to bear a schoolboy's top.
away with her!
to prison!
he who shall speak for her is afar off guilty but that he speaks.
there' i must be patient till the heavens look with an aspect more favourable.
good my lords, i am not prone to weeping, as our sex commonly are the want of which vain dew but i have that honourable grief lodged here which burns beseech you all, my lords, with thoughts so qualified as your charities shall best instruct you, measure me and so the king's will be perform'd!
shall i be heard?
who is't that goes with me?
beseech your highness, my women may be with me for you see my plight requires it.
do not weep, good fools when you shall know your mistress has deserved prison, then abound in tears this action i now go on is for my better grace.
adieu, i never wish'd to see you sorry now i trust i shall.
my women, come you have leave.
go, do our bidding hence!
beseech your highness, call the queen again.
be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice prove violence in the which three great ones suffer, yourself, your queen, your son.
for her, my lord, i dare my life lay down and will do't, sir, please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless i' the eyes of heaven and to you i mean, in this which you accuse her.
if it prove she's otherwise, i'll keep my stables where i lodge my wife i'll go in couples with her than when i feel and see her no farther trust her for every inch of woman in the world, ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, if she be.
hold your peaces.
good my lord, it is for you we speak, you are abused and by some putteron that will be damn'd for't would i knew the villain, i would landdamn him.
be she honourflaw'd, i have three daughters the eldest is eleven the second and the third, nine, and some five if this prove true, they'll pay for' by mine honour, i'll geld 'em all fourteen they shall not see, they are coheirs and i had rather glib myself than they should not produce fair issue.
cease no more.
you smell this business with a sense as cold as is a dead man' but i do see't and feel't as you feel doing thus and see withal the instruments that feel.
if it be so, there's not a grain of it the face to sweeten of the whole dungy earth.
what!
lack i credit?
i had rather you did lack than i, my lord, upon this ground and more it would content me to have her honour true than your suspicion, be blamed for't how you might.
why, what need we commune with you of this, but rather follow our forceful instigation?
our prerogative calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness imparts this which if you, or stupefied or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not relish a truth like us, inform yourselves the matter, the loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all properly ours.
and i wish, my liege, you had only in your silent judgment tried it, without more overture.
how could that be?
either thou art most ignorant by age, or thou wert born a fool.
camillo's flight, added to their familiarity, which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture, that lack'd sight only, nought for approbation but only seeing, all other circumstances made up to the deed, yet, for a greater confirmation, for in an act of this importance 'twere most piteous to be wild, i have dispatch'd in post to sacred delphos, to apollo's temple, cleomenes and dion, whom you know of stuff' now from the oracle they will bring all whose spiritual counsel had, shall stop or spur me.
have i done well?
well done, my lord.
though i am satisfied and need no more than what i know, yet shall the oracle give rest to the minds of others, such as he whose ignorant credulity will not come up to the truth.
so have we thought it good from our free person she should be confined, lest that the treachery of the two fled hence be left her to perform.
come, follow us we are to speak in public for this business will raise us all.
the keeper of the prison, call to him let him have knowledge who i am.
good lady, no court in europe is too good for thee what dost thou then in prison?
now, good sir, you know me, do you not?
for a worthy lady and one whom much i honour.
pray you then, conduct me to the queen.
i may not, to the contrary i have express commandment.
here's ado, to lock up honesty and honour from the access of gentle visitors!
is't lawful, pray you, to see her women?
any of them?
emilia?
so please you, madam, to put apart these your attendants, i shall bring emilia forth.
i pray now, call her.
withdraw yourselves.
and, madam, i must be present at your conference.
well, be't so, prithee.
here's such ado to make no stain a stain as passes colouring.
dear gentlewoman, how fares our gracious lady?
as well as one so great and so forlorn on her frights and griefs, which never tender lady hath born greater, she is something before her time deliver'd.
a boy?
a daughter, and a goodly babe, the queen receives much comfort in't says 'my poor prisoner, i am innocent as you.
' i dare be sworn these dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king, beshrew them!
he must be told on't, the office becomes a woman best i'll take' if i prove honeymouth'd let my tongue blister and never to my redlook'd anger be the trumpet any more.
pray you, emilia, if she dares trust me with her little babe, i'll show't the king and undertake to be her advocate to the loud'st.
we do not know how he may soften at the sight o' the silence often of pure innocence persuades when speaking fails.
most worthy madam, your honour and your goodness is so evident that your free undertaking cannot miss there is no lady living so meet for this great errand.
please your ladyship to visit the next room, i'll presently acquaint the queen of your most noble offer who but today hammer'd of this design, but durst not tempt a minister of honour, lest she should be denied.
tell her, emilia.
i' if wit flow from't as boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted i shall do good.
now be you blest for it!
i' please you, come something nearer.
madam, if't please the queen to send the babe, i know not what i shall incur to pass it, having no warrant.
you need not fear it, this child was prisoner to the womb and is by law and process of great nature thence freed and enfranchised, not a party to the anger of the king nor guilty of, if any be, the trespass of the queen.
i do believe it.
upon mine honour, i will stand betwixt you and danger.
it is but weakness to bear the matter thus mere weakness.
if the cause were not in being,part o' the cause, she the adulteress for the harlot king is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank and level of my brain, plotproof but she say that she were gone, given to the fire, a moiety of my rest might come to me again.
who's there?
my lord?
how does the boy?
he took good rest tonight 'tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
to see his nobleness!
conceiving the dishonour of his mother, he straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply, fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself, threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep, and downright languish'd.
go, see how he fares.
fie, fie!
the thought of my revenges that way in himself too mighty, and in his parties, his alliance let him be for present vengeance, take it on her.
camillo and polixenes laugh at me, they should not laugh if i could reach them, nor shall she within my power.
you must not enter.
nay, rather, good my lords, fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas, than the queen's life?
a gracious innocent soul, more free than he is jealous.
that's enough.
madam, he hath not slept tonight commanded none should come at him.
not so hot, i come to bring him sleep.
'tis such as you, that creep like shadows by him and do sigh at each his needless heavings, such as you i do come with words as medicinal as true, honest as either, to purge him of that humour that presses him from sleep.
what noise there, ho?
no noise, my lord but needful conference about some gossips for your highness.
how!
away with that audacious lady!
antigonus, i knew she would.
i told her so, my lord, on your displeasure's peril and on mine, she should not visit you.
what, canst not rule her?
in this, unless he take the course that you have done, commit me for committing honour, trust it, he shall not rule me.
la you now, when she will take the rein i let her run but she'll not stumble.
good my liege, i come and, i beseech you, hear me, who profess myself your loyal servant, your physician, your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare less appear so in comforting your evils, i say, i come from your good queen.
good queen!
good queen, my lord, good queen i say good queen and would by combat make her good, so were i a man, the worst about you.
force her hence.
let him that makes but trifles of his eyes on mine own accord i'll off but first i'll do my errand.
the good queen, for she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter here 'tis commends it to your blessing.
out!
a mankind witch!
hence with her, out o' a most intelligencing bawd!
i am as ignorant in that as you in so entitling me, and no less honest than you are mad which is enough, i'll warrant, as this world goes, to pass for honest.
traitors!
will you not push her out?
give her the bastard.
thou dotard!
thou art womantired, unroosted by thy dame partlet here.
take up the bastard take't up, i say give't to thy crone.
for ever unvenerable be thy hands, if thou takest up the princess by that forced baseness which he has put upon't!
he dreads his wife.
so i would you did then 'twere past all doubt you'ld call your children yours.
a nest of traitors!
i am none, by this good light.
nor i, nor any but one that's here, and that's himself, for he the sacred honour of himself, his queen's, his hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander, whose sting is sharper than the sword's and will not for, as the case now stands, it is a curse he cannot be compell'd to'tonce remove the root of his opinion, which is rotten as ever oak or stone was sound.
a callat of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband and now baits me!
this brat is none of mine hence with it, and together with the dam commit them to the fire!
it is yours and, might we lay the old proverb to your charge, so like you, 'tis the worse.
behold, my lords, although the print be little, the whole matter and copy of the father, eye, nose, lip, the trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley, the pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, his smiles, the very mould and frame of hand, nail, and thou, good goddess nature, which hast made it so like to him that got it, if thou hast the ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours no yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does, her children not her husband's!
a gross hag and, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd, that wilt not stay her tongue.
hang all the husbands that cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself hardly one subject.
once more, take her hence.
a most unworthy and unnatural lord can do no more.
i'll ha' thee burnt.
it is an heretic that makes the fire, not she which burns in't.
i'll not call you tyrant but this most cruel usage of your queen, not able to produce more accusation than your own weakhinged fancy, something savours of tyranny and will ignoble make you, yea, scandalous to the world.
on your allegiance, out of the chamber with her!
were i a tyrant, where were her life?
she durst not call me so, if she did know me one.
away with her!
i pray you, do not push me i'll be gone.
look to your babe, my lord ' jove send her a better guiding spirit!
what needs these hands?
you, that are thus so tender o'er his follies, will never do him good, not one of you.
so, farewell we are gone.
thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
my child?
away with't!
even thou, that hast a heart so tender o'er it, take it hence and see it instantly consumed with fire even thou and none but thou.
within this hour bring me word 'tis done, and by good testimony, or i'll seize thy life, with what thou else call'st thine.
if thou refuse and wilt encounter with my wrath, say so the bastard brains with these my proper hands shall i dash out.
go, take it to the fire for thou set'st on thy wife.
i did not, these lords, my noble fellows, if they please, can clear me in't.
my royal liege, he is not guilty of her coming hither.
you're liars all.
beseech your highness, we have always truly served you, and beseech you so to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg, as recompense of our dear services past and to come, that you do change this purpose, which being so horrible, so bloody, must we all kneel.
shall i live on to see this bastard kneel and call me father?
better burn it now than curse it then.
but be it let it live.
it shall not neither.
you, sir, come you hither you that have been so tenderly officious with lady margery, your midwife there, to save this bastard's life,for 'tis a bastard, so sure as this beard's grey, what will you adventure to save this brat's life?
any thing, my lord, that my ability may undergo i'll pawn the little blood which i have left any thing possible.
it shall be possible.
swear by this sword thou wilt perform my bidding.
i will, my lord.
mark and perform it, see'st thou!
for the fail of any point in't shall not only be death to thyself but to thy lewdtongued wife, whom for this time we pardon.
we enjoin thee, as thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry this female bastard hence and that thou bear it to some remote and desert place quite out of our dominions, and that there thou leave it, without more mercy, to its own protection and favour of the climate.
as by strange fortune it came to us, i do in justice charge thee, on thy soul's peril and thy body's torture, that thou commend it strangely to some place where chance may nurse or end it.
take it up.
i swear to do this, though a present death had been more merciful.
come on, some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens to be thy nurses!
wolves and bears, they say casting their savageness aside have done like offices of pity.
sir, be prosperous in more than this deed does require!
and blessing against this cruelty fight on thy side, poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
no, i'll not rear another's issue.
please your highness, posts from those you sent to the oracle are come cleomenes and dion, being well arrived from delphos, are both landed, hasting to the court.
so please you, sir, their speed hath been beyond account.
twentythree days 'tis good speed foretells the great apollo suddenly will have the truth of this appear.
prepare you, lords summon a session, that we may arraign our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath been publicly accused, so shall she have a just and open trial.
while she lives my heart will be a burthen to me.
leave me, and think upon my bidding.
the climate's delicate, the air most sweet, fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing the common praise it bears.
i shall report, for most it caught me, the celestial habits, methinks i so should term them, and the reverence of the grave wearers.
o, the sacrifice!
how ceremonious, solemn and unearthly it was i' the offering!
but of all, the burst and the eardeafening voice o' the oracle, kin to jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
that i was nothing.
if the event o' the journey prove as successful to the queen,o be't so!
as it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy, the time is worth the use on't.
great apollo turn all to the best!
these proclamations, so forcing faults upon hermione, i little like.
the violent carriage of it when the oracle, thus by apollo's great divine seal'd up, shall the contents discover, something rare even then will rush to knowledge.
fresh horses!
and gracious be the issue!
this sessions, to our great grief we pronounce, even pushes ' the party tried the daughter of a king, our wife, and one of us too much beloved.
let us be clear'd of being tyrannous, since we so openly proceed in justice, which shall have due course, even to the guilt or the purgation.
produce the prisoner.
it is his highness' pleasure that the queen appear in person here in court.
silence!
read the indictment.
since what i am to say must be but that which contradicts my accusation and the testimony on my part no other but what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me to say '' mine integrity being counted falsehood, shall, as i express it, be so received.
if powers divine behold our human actions, as they do, i doubt not then but innocence shall make false accusation blush and tyranny tremble at patience.
you, my lord, best know, who least will seem to do so, my past life hath been as continent, as chaste, as true, as i am now unhappy which is more than history can pattern, though devised and play'd to take spectators.
for behold me a fellow of the royal bed, which owe a moiety of the throne a great king's daughter, the mother to a hopeful prince, here standing to prate and talk for life and honour 'fore who please to come and hear.
for life, i prize it as i weigh grief, for honour, 'tis a derivative from me to mine, and only that i stand for.
i appeal to your own conscience, sir, before polixenes came to your court, how i was in your grace, how merited to be so since he came, with what encounter so uncurrent i have strain' if one jot beyond the bound of honour, or in act or will that way inclining, harden'd be the hearts of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin cry fie upon my grave!
i ne'er heard yet that any of these bolder vices wanted less impudence to gainsay what they did than to perform it first.
that's true enough through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
you will not own it.
more than mistress of which comes to me in name of fault, i must not at all acknowledge.
for polixenes, with whom i am accused, i do confess i loved him as in honour he required, with such a kind of love as might become a lady like me, with a love even such, so and no other, which not to have done i think had been in me both disobedience and ingratitude to you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke, even since it could speak, from an infant, freely that it was yours.
now, for conspiracy, i know not how it tastes though it be dish'd all i know of it is that camillo was an honest man and why he left your court, the gods themselves, wotting no more than i, are ignorant.
you knew of his departure, as you know what you have underta'en to do in's absence.
sir, my life stands in the level of your dreams, which i'll lay down.
your actions are my dreams you had a bastard by polixenes, and i but dream'd it.
as you were past all shame, those of your fact are so which to deny concerns more than avails for as thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself, no father owning it,which is, indeed, more criminal in thee than it,so thou shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage look for no less than death.
sir, the bug which you would fright me with i seek.
the crown and comfort of my life, your favour, i do give lost for i do feel it gone, but know not how it went.
my second joy and firstfruits of my body, from his presence i am barr'd, like one infectious.
my third comfort starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast, the innocent milk in its most innocent mouth, myself on every post with immodest hatred the childbed privilege denied, which 'longs to women of all fashion lastly, hurried here to this place, i' the open air, before i have got strength of limit.
now, my liege, tell me what blessings i have here alive, that i should fear to die?
therefore proceed.
mistake me not no life, i prize it not a straw, but for mine honour, which i would free, if i shall be condemn'd upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else but what your jealousies awake, i tell you 'tis rigor and not law.
your honours all, apollo be my judge!
this your request therefore bring forth, and in apollos name, his oracle.
o that he were alive, and here beholding his daughter's trial!
that he did but see the flatness of my misery, yet with eyes of pity, not revenge!
you here shall swear upon this sword of justice, that you, cleomenes and dion, have been both at delphos, and from thence have brought the seal'dup oracle, by the hand deliver'd of great apollo's priest and that, since then, you have not dared to break the holy seal nor read the secrets in't.
all this we swear.
break up the seals and read.
now blessed be the great apollo!
praised!
hast thou read truth?
ay, my lord even so as it is here set down.
there is no truth at all i' this is mere falsehood.
my lord the king, the king!
what is the business?
o sir, i shall be hated to report it!
the prince your son, with mere conceit and fear of the queen's speed, is gone.
how!
gone!
is dead.
apollo's angry and the heavens themselves do strike at my injustice.
how now there!
look down and see what death is doing.
her heart is but o'ercharged beseech you, tenderly apply to her some remedies for life.
apollo, pardon my great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
i'll reconcile me to polixenes, new woo my queen, recall the good camillo, whom i proclaim a man of truth, of mercy for, being transported by my jealousies to bloody thoughts and to revenge, i chose camillo for the minister to poison which had been done, but that the good mind of camillo tardied my swift command, though i with death and with reward did threaten and encourage him, not doing ' he, most humane and fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here, which you knew great, and to the hazard of all encertainties himself commended, how he glisters thorough my rust!
and how his pity does my deeds make the blacker!
woe the while!
o, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it, break too.
what fit is this, good lady?
what studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
what wheels?
racks?
fires?
what flaying?
boiling?
in leads or oils?
what old or newer torture must i receive, whose every word deserves to taste of thy most worst?
thy tyranny together working with thy jealousies, fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle for girls of nine, o, think what they have done and then run mad indeed, stark mad!
for all thy bygone fooleries were but spices of it.
that thou betray'dst polixenes,'twas nothing that did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant nor was't much, thou wouldst have poison'd good camillo's honour, poor trespasses, whereof i reckon the casting forth to crows thy babydaughter to be or none or little though a devil would have shed water out of fire ere done' nor is't directly laid to thee, the death of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts, thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart that could conceive a gross and foolish sire blemish' this is not, no, but the last,o lords, when i have said, cry 'woe!
' the queen, the queen, the sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead, and vengeance for't not dropp'd down yet.
the higher powers forbid!
i say she's dead i'll swear't.
if word nor oath prevail not, if you can bring tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, heat outwardly or breath within, i'll serve you as i would do the gods.
but, o thou tyrant!
do not repent these things, for they are heavier than all thy woes can stir therefore betake thee to nothing but despair.
a thousand knees ten thousand years together, naked, fasting, upon a barren mountain and still winter in storm perpetual, could not move the gods to look that way thou wert.
go on, go on thou canst not speak too much i have deserved all tongues to talk their bitterest.
howe'er the business goes, you have made fault i' the boldness of your speech.
i am sorry for' all faults i make, when i shall come to know them, i do repent.
alas!
i have show'd too much he is touch'd to the noble heart.
what's gone and what's past help do not receive affliction at my petition i beseech you, rather let me be punish'd, that have minded you of what you should forget.
now, good my liege sir, royal sir, the love i bore your queenlo, fool again!
i'll speak of her no more, nor of your children i'll not remember you of my own lord, take your patience to you, and i'll say nothing.
thou didst speak but well when most the truth which i receive much better than to be pitied of thee.
prithee, bring me upon them shall the causes of their death appear, unto our shame perpetual.
once a day i'll visit the chapel where they lie, and tears shed there so long as nature will bear up with this exercise, so long i daily vow to use it.
come and lead me unto these sorrows.
thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon the deserts of bohemia?
ay, and fear the skies look grimly and threaten present blusters.
in my conscience, the heavens with that we have in hand are angry and frown upon 's.
their sacred wills be done!
go, get aboard i'll not be long before i call upon thee.
make your best haste, and go not too far i' 'tis like to be loud weather besides, this place is famous for the creatures of prey that keep upon't.
i'll follow instantly.
i am glad at heart to be so rid o' the business.
come, i have heard, but not believed, the spirits o' the dead if such thing be, thy mother appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream so like a waking.
to me comes a creature, sometimes her head on one side, some another i never saw a vessel of like sorrow, so fill' in pure white robes, like very sanctity, she did approach my cabin where i lay thrice bow'd before me, and gasping to begin some speech, her eyes the fury spent, anon did this break 'good antigonus, since fate, against thy better disposition, hath made thy person for the throwerout of my poor babe, according to thine oath, places remote enough are in bohemia, there weep and leave it crying and, for the babe is counted lost for ever, perdita, i prithee, call't.
for this ungentle business put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see thy wife paulina more.
' and so, with shrieks she melted into air.
affrighted much, i did in time collect myself and thought this was so and no slumber.
yet for this once, yea, superstitiously, i will be squared by this.
i do believe hermione hath suffer'd death, and that apollo would, this being indeed the issue of king polixenes, it should here be laid, either for life or death, upon the earth of its right father.
blossom, speed thee well!
there lie, there these which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, and still rest thine.
the storm begins poor wretch, that for thy mother's fault art thus exposed to loss and what may follow!
weep i cannot, but my heart bleeds and most accursed am i to be by oath enjoin'd to this.
farewell!
thou'rt like to have i never saw the heavens so dim by day.
a savage clamour!
well may i get aboard!
i am gone for ever.
i would there were no age between sixteen and threeandtwenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest for there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fightinghark you now!
would any but these boiled brains of nineteen and twoandtwenty hunt this weather?
they have scared away two of my best sheep, which i fear the wolf will sooner find if any where i have them, 'tis by the seaside, browsing of ivy.
good luck, an't be thy will what have we here!
mercy on 's, a barne a very pretty barne!
a boy or a child, i wonder?
a pretty one sure, some ' though i am not bookish, yet i can read waitinggentlewoman in the 'scape.
this has been some stairwork, some trunkwork, some behinddoor they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here.
i'll take it up for yet i'll tarry till my son come he hallooed but even now.
whoa, ho, hoa!
hilloa, loa!
what, art so near?
if thou'lt see a thing to talk on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither.
what ailest thou, man?
i have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but i am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point.
why, boy, how is it?
i would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up the shore!
but that's not the point.
o, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a cork into a hogshead.
and then for the landservice, to see how the bear tore out his shoulderbone how he cried to me for help and said his name was antigonus, a nobleman.
but to make an end of the ship, to see how the sea flapdragoned but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them and how the poor gentleman roared and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea or weather.
name of mercy, when was this, boy?
now, i have not winked since i saw these the men are not yet cold under water, nor he's at it now.
would i had been by, to have helped the old man!
i would you had been by the ship side, to have there your charity would have lacked footing.
heavy matters!
heavy matters!
but look thee here, boy.
thou mettest with things dying, i with things newborn.
here's a sight for thee look thee, a bearingcloth for a squire's child!
look thee here take up, take up, boy open't.
so, let' it was told me i should be rich by the fairies.
open't.
what's within, boy?
you' if the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you're well to live.
gold!
all gold!
this is fairy gold, boy, and ' up with't, home, home, the next way.
we are lucky, boy and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy.
come, good boy, the next way home.
go you the next way with your findings.
i'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much they are never curst but when they if there be any of him left, i'll bury it.
that's a good deed.
if thou mayest discern by that which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the sight of him.
marry, will i and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
'tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
i, that please some, try all, both joy and terror of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error, now take upon me, in the name of time, to use my wings.
impute it not a crime to me or my swift passage, that i slide o'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried of that wide gap, since it is in my power to o'erthrow law and in one selfborn hour to plant and o'erwhelm custom.
let me pass the same i am, ere ancient'st order was i witness to the times that brought them in so shall i do to the freshest things now reigning and make stale the glistering of this present, as my tale now seems to it.
your patience this allowing, i turn my glass and give my scene such growing leontes leaving, the effects of his fond jealousies so grieving that he shuts up himself, imagine me, gentle spectators, that i now may be in fair bohemia, and remember well, i mentioned a son o' the king's, which florizel i now name to you and with speed so pace to speak of perdita, now grown in grace what of her ensues i list not prophecy but let time's news be known when 'tis brought forth.
a shepherd's daughter, and what to her adheres, which follows after, is the argument of time.
of this allow, if ever you have spent time worse ere now if never, yet that time himself doth say he wishes earnestly you never may.
i pray thee, good camillo, 'tis a sickness denying thee any thing a death to grant this.
though i have for the most part been aired abroad, i desire to lay my bones there.
besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent for me to whose feeling sorrows i might be some allay, or i o'erween to think so, which is another spur to my departure.
as thou lovest me, camillo, wipe not out the rest of the need i have of thee thine own goodness hath made better not to thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute them thyself or take away with thee the very services thou hast done which if i have not enough considered, as too much i cannot, to be more thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit therein the heaping friendships.
of that fatal country, sicilia, prithee speak no more whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance of that penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king, my brother whose loss of his most precious queen and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
say to me, when sawest thou the prince florizel, my son?
kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues.
sir, it is three days since i saw the prince.
what his happier affairs may be, but i have missingly noted, he is of late much retired from court and is less frequent to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared.
i have considered so much, camillo, and with some care so far that i have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness from whom i have this intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd a man, they say, that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
i have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
that's likewise part of my intelligence but, i fear, the angle that plucks our son thither.
thou shalt accompany us to the place where we will, not appearing what we are, have some question with the shepherd from whose simplicity i think it not uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
prithee, be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of sicilia.
i willingly obey your command.
my best camillo!
we must disguise ourselves.
when daffodils begin to peer, with heigh!
the doxy over the dale, why, then comes in the sweet o' the year for the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
the white sheet bleaching on the hedge, with heigh!
the sweet birds, o, how they sing!
doth set my pugging tooth on edge for a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
the lark, that tirralyra chants, with heigh!
with heigh!
the thrush and the jay, are summer songs for me and my aunts, while we lie tumbling in the hay.
i have served prince florizel and in my time wore threepile but shall i go mourn for that, my dear?
and when i wander here and there, i then do most go right.
if tinkers may have leave to live, and bear the sowskin budget, then my account i well may, give, and in the stocks avouch it.
my traffic is sheets when the kite builds, look to lesser linen.
my father named me autolycus who being, as i am, littered under mercury, was likewise a snapperup of unconsidered trifles.
with die and drab i purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat.
gallows and knock are too powerful beating and hanging are terrors to for the life to come, i sleep out the thought of it.
a prize!
a prize!
every 'leven wether tods every tod yields pound and odd shilling fifteen hundred shorn.
what comes the wool to?
i cannot do't without counters.
let me see what am i to buy for our sheepshearing feast?
three pound of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,what will this sister of mine do with rice?
but my father hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it on.
she hath made me four and twenty nosegays for the shearers, threemansongmen all, and very good ones but they are most of them means and bases but one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to hornpipes.
i must have saffron to colour the warden pies mace dates?
none, that's out of my note nutmegs, seven a race or two of ginger, but that i may beg four pound of prunes, and as many of raisins o' the sun.
o that ever i was born!
i' the name of me o, help me, help me!
pluck but off these rags and then, death, death!
alack, poor soul!
thou hast need of more rags to lay on thee, rather than have these off.
o sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes i have received, which are mighty ones and millions.
alas, poor man!
a million of beating may come to a great matter.
i am robbed, sir, and beaten my money and apparel ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon me.
what, by a horseman, or a footman?
a footman, sweet sir, a footman.
indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he if this be a horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot service.
lend me thy hand, i' come, lend me thy hand.
o, good sir, tenderly, o!
alas, poor soul!
o, good sir, softly, good sir!
i fear, sir, my shoulderblade is out.
how now!
canst stand?
dost lack any money?
i have a little money for thee.
no, good sweet sir no, i beseech you, i have a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom i was going i shall there have money, or offer me no money, i pray you that kills my heart.
what manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
a fellow, sir, that i have known to go about with trollmydames i knew him once a servant of the i cannot tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.
his vices, you would say there's no virtue whipped they cherish it to make it stay there and yet it will no more but abide.
vices, i would say, sir.
he hath been since an apebearer then a processserver, a bailiff then he compassed a motion of the prodigal son, and married a tinker's wife within a mile where my land and living lies and, having flown over many knavish professions, he some call him autolycus.
out upon him!
prig, for my life, he haunts wakes, fairs and bearbaitings.
very true, sir he, sir, he that's the rogue that put me into this apparel.
if you had but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
i must confess to you, sir, i am false of heart that way and that he knew, i warrant him.
how do you now?
sweet sir, much better than i was i can stand and i will even take my leave of you, and pace softly towards my kinsman's.
shall i bring thee on the way?
no, goodfaced sir no, sweet sir.
i must go buy spices for our sheepshearing.
prosper you, sweet sir!
your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
i'll be with you at your sheep if i make not this cheat bring out another and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name put in the book of virtue!
jog on, jog on, the footpath way, and merrily hent the stile a merry heart goes all the day, your sad tires in a milea.
these your unusual weeds to each part of you no shepherdess, but flora peering in april's front.
this your sheepshearing is as a meeting of the petty gods, and you the queen on't.
sir, my gracious lord, o, pardon, that i name them!
your high self, the gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured with a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid, most goddesslike prank' but that our feasts in every mess have folly and the feeders digest it with a custom, i should blush to see you so attired, sworn, i think, to show myself a glass.
i bless the time when my good falcon made her flight across thy father's ground.
now jove afford you cause!
to me the difference forges dread your greatness hath not been used to fear.
even now i tremble to think your father, by some accident, o, the fates!
how would he look, to see his work so noble vilely bound up?
what would he say?
or how should i, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold the sternness of his presence?
apprehend nothing but jollity.
the gods themselves, humbling their deities to love, have taken jupiter became a bull, and bellow'd the green neptune a ram, and bleated and the firerobed god, golden apollo, a poor humble swain, as i seem now.
their transformations were never for a piece of beauty rarer, nor in a way so chaste, since my desires run not before mine honour, nor my lusts burn hotter than my faith.
o, but, sir, your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis opposed, as it must be, one of these two must be necessities, which then will speak, that you must change this purpose, or i my life.
thou dearest perdita, with these forced thoughts, i prithee, darken not the mirth o' the feast.
or i'll be thine, my fair, or not my father's.
for i cannot be mine own, nor any thing to any, if i be not thine.
to this i am most constant, though destiny say no.
be merry, gentle strangle such thoughts as these with any thing that you behold the while.
lift up your countenance, as it were the day of celebration of that nuptial which we two have sworn shall come.
o lady fortune, stand you auspicious!
see, address yourself to entertain them sprightly, and let's be red with mirth.
fie, daughter!
when my old wife lived, upon this day she was both pantler, butler, cook, both dame and servant welcomed all, served all would sing her song and dance her turn now here, at upper end o' the table, now i' the middle on his shoulder, and his her face o' fire with labour and the thing she took to quench it, she would to each one sip.
you are retired, as if you were a feasted one and not pray you, bid these unknown friends to's welcome for it is a way to make us better friends, more known.
come, quench your blushes and present yourself that which you are, mistress o' come on, and bid us welcome to your sheepshearing, as your good flock shall prosper.
shepherdess, a fair one are youwell you fit our ages with flowers of winter.
sir, the year growing ancient, not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o' the season are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors, which some call nature' of that kind our rustic garden's barren and i care not to get slips of them.
wherefore, gentle maiden, do you neglect them?
for i have heard it said there is an art which in their piedness shares with great creating nature.
say there be yet nature is made better by no mean so, over that art which you say adds to nature, is an art that nature makes.
you see, sweet maid, we marry a gentler scion to the wildest stock, and make conceive a bark of baser kind this is an art which does mend nature, change it rather, but the art itself is nature.
so it is.
then make your garden rich in gillyvors, and do not call them bastards.
i'll not put the dibble in earth to set one slip of them no more than were i painted i would wish this youth should say 'twere well and only therefore desire to breed by me.
here's flowers for you hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram the marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun these are flowers of middle summer, and i think they are given to men of middle age.
you're very welcome.
i should leave grazing, were i of your flock, and only live by gazing.
out, alas!
you'd be so lean, that blasts of january would blow you through and through.
now, my fair'st friend, i would i had some flowers o' the spring that might become your time of day and yours, and yours, that wear upon your virgin branches yet o proserpina, for the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall from dis's waggon!
daffodils, that come before the swallow dares, and take the winds of march with beauty violets dim, but sweeter than the lids of juno's eyes or cytherea's breath pale primroses that die unmarried, ere they can behold bight phoebus in his strengtha malady most incident to maids bold oxlips and the crown imperial lilies of all kinds, the flowerdeluce being one!
o, these i lack, to make you garlands of, and my sweet friend, to strew him o'er and o'er!
what, like a corse?
no, like a bank for love to lie and play on not like a corse or if, not to be buried, but quick and in mine arms.
come, methinks i play as i have seen them do sure this robe of mine does change my disposition.
what you do still betters what is done.
when you speak, sweet.
i' when you sing, i'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms, pray so and, for the ordering your affairs, when you do dance, i wish you a wave o' the sea, that you might ever do nothing but that move still, still so, each your doing, so singular in each particular, crowns what you are doing in the present deed, that all your acts are queens.
o doricles, but that your youth, and the true blood which peepeth fairly through't, do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd, with wisdom i might fear, my doricles, you woo'd me the false way.
i think you have as little skill to fear as i have purpose to put you to't.
but come our dance, your hand, so turtles pair, that never mean to part.
i'll swear for 'em.
this is the prettiest lowborn lass that ever ran on the green nothing she does or seems but smacks of something greater than herself, too noble for this place.
he tells her something good sooth, she is the queen of curds and cream.
come on, strike up!
marry, garlic, to mend her kissing with!
now, in good time!
not a word, a word we stand upon our manners.
come, strike up!
pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this which dances with your daughter?
they call him doricles and boasts himself but i have it upon his own report and i believe it he looks like sooth.
i think so too for never gazed the moon upon the water as he'll stand and read as 'twere my daughter' and, to be plain.
i think there is not half a kiss to choose who loves another best.
she dances featly.
so she does any thing though i report it, if young doricles do light upon her, she shall bring him that which he not dreams of.
o master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you would never dance again after a tabour and pipe no, he sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money he utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's ears grew to his tunes.
he could never come better he shall come in.
i love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.
he hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes no he has the prettiest lovesongs for maids so without bawdry, which is strange with such delicate burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump her' and where some stretchmouthed rascal would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'whoop, do me no harm, good man' puts him off, slights him, with 'whoop, do me no harm, good man.
' this is a brave fellow.
believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow.
has he any unbraided wares?
he hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow points more than all the lawyers in bohemia can learnedly handle, though they come to him by the inkles, caddisses, cambrics, why, he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses you would think a smock were a sheangel, he so chants to the sleevehand and the work about the square on't.
prithee bring him in and let him approach singing.
forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.
you have of these pedlars, that have more in them than you'ld think, sister.
ay, good brother, or go about to think.
lawn as white as driven snow cyprus black as e'er was crow gloves as sweet as damask roses masks for faces and for noses bugle bracelet, necklace amber, perfume for a lady's chamber golden quoifs and stomachers, pins and pokingsticks of steel, come buy of me, come come buy, come buy buy lads, come buy.
if i were not in love with mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me but being enthralled as i am, it will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
i was promised them against the feast but they come not too late now.
he hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
he hath paid you all he promised you may be, he has paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
is there no manners left among maids?
will they wear their plackets where they should bear their faces?
is there not milkingtime, when you are going to bed, or kilnhole, to whistle off these secrets, but you must be tittletattling before all our guests?
' clamour your tongues, and not a word more.
i have done.
come, you promised me a tawdrylace and a pair of sweet gloves.
have i not told thee how i was cozened by the way and lost all my money?
and indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad therefore it behoves men to be wary.
fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
i hope so, sir for i have about me many parcels of charge.
what hast here?
ballads?
pray now, i love a ballad in print o' life, for then we are sure they are true.
here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty moneybags at a burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and toads carbonadoed.
is it true, think you?
very true, and but a month old.
bless me from marrying a usurer!
here's the midwife's name to't, one mistress taleporter, and five or six honest wives that were present.
why should i carry lies abroad?
pray you now, buy it.
come on, and let's first see moe ballads we'll buy the other things anon.
here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon the coast on wednesday the fourscore of april, forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this it was thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
is it true too, think you?
five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than my pack will hold.
another.
this is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
let's have some merry ones.
why, this is a passing merry one and goes to the tune of '' there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it 'tis in request, i can tell you.
if thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear 'tis in three parts.
we had the tune on't a month ago.
i can bear my part you must know 'tis my occupation have at it with you.
get you hence, for i must go where it fits not you to know.
whither?
o, whither?
whither?
it becomes thy oath full well, thou to me thy secrets tell.
me too, let me go thither.
or thou goest to the orange or mill.
if to either, thou dost ill.
neither.
what, neither?
neither.
thou hast sworn my love to be.
then whither goest?
say, whither?
we' my father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them.
come, bring away thy pack after me.
wenches, i'll buy for you both.
pedlar, let's have the first choice.
follow me, girls.
and you shall pay well for 'em.
will you buy any tape, or lace for your cape, my dainty duck, my deara?
any silk, any thread, any toys for your head, of the new'st and finest, finest weara?
come to the pedlar money's a medler.
that doth utter all men's warea.
master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three neatherds, three swineherds, that have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not in't but they themselves are o' the mind, if it be not too rough for some that know little but bowling, it will please plentifully.
away!
we'll none on ' here has been too much homely foolery already.
i know, sir, we weary you.
pray, let's see these four threes of herdsmen.
one three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danced before the king and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
since these good men are pleased, let them come in but quickly now.
why, they stay at door, sir.
o, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
is it not too far gone?
'tis time to part them.
he's simple and tells much.
how now, fair shepherd!
your heart is full of something that does take your mind from feasting.
sooth, when i was young and handed love as you do, i was wont i would have ransack'd the pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it to her acceptance you have let him go and nothing marted with him.
if your lass interpretation should abuse and call this your lack of love or bounty, you were straited for a reply, at least if you make a care of happy holding her.
old sir, i know the gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd up in my heart which i have given already, but not deliver'd.
o, hear me breathe my life before this ancient sir, who, it should seem, hath sometime loved!
i take thy hand, this hand, as soft as dove's down and as white as it, or ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er.
what follows this?
how prettily the young swain seems to wash the hand was fair before!
but to your protestation let me hear what you profess.
do, and be witness to 't.
and this my neighbour too?
and he, and more than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, that, were i crown'd the most imperial monarch, thereof most worthy, were i the fairest youth that ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge more than was ever man's, i would not prize them without her love for her employ them all commend them and condemn them to her service or to their own perdition.
fairly offer'd.
this shows a sound affection.
but, my daughter, say you the like to him?
i cannot speak so well, nothing so well no, by the pattern of mine own thoughts i cut out the purity of his.
take hands, a bargain!
and, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to ' i give my daughter to him, and will make her portion equal his.
o, that must be i' one being dead, i shall have more than you can dream of yet enough then for your wonder.
but, come on, contract us 'fore these witnesses.
come, your hand and, daughter, yours.
soft, swain, awhile, beseech you have you a father?
but what of him?
knows he of this?
he neither does nor shall.
methinks a father is at the nuptial of his son a guest that best becomes the table.
pray you once more, is not your father grown incapable of reasonable affairs?
is he not stupid with age and altering rheums?
can he speak?
hear?
know man from man?
dispute his own estate?
lies he not bedrid?
and again does nothing but what he did being childish?
no, good sir he has his health and ampler strength indeed than most have of his age.
by my white beard, you offer him, if this be so, a wrong reason my son should choose himself a wife, but as good reason the father, all whose joy is nothing else but fair posterity, should hold some counsel in such a business.
i yield all this but for some other reasons, my grave sir, which 'tis not fit you know, i not acquaint my father of this business.
let him know't.
he shall not.
prithee, let him.
no, he must not.
let him, he shall not need to grieve at knowing of thy choice.
come, come, he must not.
mark our contract.
mark your divorce, young sir, whom son i dare not call thou art too base thou a sceptre's heir, that thus affect'st a sheephook!
thou old traitor, i am sorry that by hanging thee i can but shorten thy life one week.
and thou, fresh piece of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know the royal fool thou copest with, o, my heart!
i'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made more homely than thy state.
for thee, fond boy, if i may ever know thou dost but sigh that thou no more shalt see this knack, as never i mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin, follow us to the court.
thou churl, for this time, though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee from the dead blow of it.
and you, enchantment.
yea, him too, that makes himself, but for our honour therein, unworthy thee,if ever henceforth thou these rural latches to his entrance open, or hoop his body more with thy embraces, i will devise a death as cruel for thee as thou art tender to't.
even here undone!
i was not much afeard for once or twice i was about to speak and tell him plainly, the selfsame sun that shines upon his court hides not his visage from our cottage but looks on alike.
will't please you, sir, be gone?
beseech you, this dream of mine, being now awake, i'll queen it no inch farther, but milk my ewes and weep.
why, how now, father!
speak ere thou diest.
i cannot speak, nor think nor dare to know that which i know.
o sir!
you have undone a man of fourscore three, that thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea, to die upon the bed my father died, but now some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me where no priest shovels in dust.
o cursed wretch, that knew'st this was the prince, and wouldst adventure to mingle faith with him!
undone!
undone!
if i might die within this hour, i have lived to die when i desire.
why look you so upon me?
i am but sorry, not afeard delay'd, but nothing alter' what i was, i am more straining on for plucking back, not following my leash unwillingly.
gracious my lord, you know your father' at this time he will allow no speech, which i do guess you do not purpose to him and as hardly will he endure your sight as yet, then, till the fury of his highness settle, come not before him.
i not purpose it.
i think, camillo?
even he, my lord.
how often have i told you 'twould be thus!
how often said, my dignity would last but till 'twere known!
it cannot fail but by the violation of my faith and then let nature crush the sides o' the earth together and mar the seeds within!
from my succession wipe me, father i am heir to my affection.
be advised.
i am, if my reason will thereto be obedient, i have reason if not, my senses, better pleased with madness, do bid it welcome.
this is desperate, sir.
but it does fulfil my vow i needs must think it honesty.
camillo, not for bohemia, nor the pomp that may be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or the close earth wombs or the profound sea hides in unknown fathoms, will i break my oath therefore, i pray you, as you have ever been my father's honour'd friend, when he shall miss me,as, in faith, i mean not to see him any more,cast your good counsels upon his passion let myself and fortune tug for the time to come.
this you may know and so deliver, i am put to sea with her whom here i cannot hold on shore and most opportune to our need i have a vessel rides fast by, but not prepared for this design.
what course i mean to hold shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor concern me the reporting.
o my lord!
i would your spirit were easier for advice, or stronger for your need.
hark, perdita i'll hear you by and by.
he's irremoveable, resolved for flight.
now were i happy, if his going i could frame to serve my turn, save him from danger, do him love and honour, purchase the sight again of dear sicilia and that unhappy king, my master, whom i so much thirst to see.
now, good camillo i am so fraught with curious business that i leave out ceremony.
sir, i think you have heard of my poor services, i' the love that i have borne your father?
very nobly it is my father's music to speak your deeds, not little of his care to have them recompensed as thought on.
well, my lord, if you may please to think i love the king and through him what is nearest to him, which is your gracious self, if your more ponderous and settled project may suffer alteration, on mine honour, i'll point you where you shall have such receiving as shall become your highness where you may enjoy your mistress, from the whom, i see, there's no disjunction to be made, but by as heavens forefend!
your ruin marry her, and, with my best endeavours in your absence, your discontenting father strive to qualify and bring him up to liking.
how, camillo, may this, almost a miracle, be done?
that i may call thee something more than man and after that trust to thee.
have you thought on a place whereto you'll go?
but as the unthoughton accident is guilty to what we wildly do, so we profess ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies of every wind that blows.
this follows, if you will not change your purpose but undergo this flight, make for sicilia, and there present yourself and your fair princess, for so i see she must be, ' she shall be habited as it becomes the partner of your bed.
methinks i see leontes opening his free arms and weeping his welcomes forth asks thee the son forgiveness, as 'twere i' the father's person kisses the hands of your fresh princess o'er and o'er divides him 'twixt his unkindness and his kindness the one he chides to hell and bids the other grow faster than thought or time.
worthy camillo, what colour for my visitation shall i hold up before him?
sent by the king your father to greet him and to give him comforts.
sir, the manner of your bearing towards him, with what you as from your father shall deliver, things known betwixt us three, i' the which shall point you forth at every sitting what you must say that he shall not perceive but that you have your father's bosom there and speak his very heart.
there is some sap in this.
a cause more promising than a wild dedication of yourselves to unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain to miseries enough no hope to help you, but as you shake off one to take another nothing so certain as your anchors, who do their best office, if they can but stay you where you' besides you know prosperity's the very bond of love, whose fresh complexion and whose heart together affliction alters.
i think affliction may subdue the cheek, but not take in the mind.
yea, say you so?
there shall not at your father's house these seven years be born another such.
my good camillo, she is as forward of her breeding as she is i' the rear our birth.
i cannot say 'tis pity she lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress to most that teach.
your pardon, sir for this i'll blush you thanks.
my prettiest perdita!
but o, the thorns we stand upon!
camillo, preserver of my father, now of me, the medicine of our house, how shall we do?
we are not furnish'd like bohemia's son, nor shall appear in sicilia.
my lord, i think you know my fortunes it shall be so my care to have you royally appointed as if the scene you play were mine.
for instance, sir, that you may know you shall not want, one word.
ha, ha!
what a fool honesty is!
and trust, his sworn brother, a very simple gentleman!
i have sold all my trumpery not a counterfeit stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, tablebook, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoetie, bracelet, hornring, they throng who should buy first, as if my trinkets had been by which means i saw whose purse was best in picture and what i saw, to my good use i remembered.
my clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes till he had both tune and words which so drew the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses you might have pinched a placket, it was senseless 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a purse i could have filed keys off that hung in no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring the nothing of it.
so that in this time of lethargy i picked and cut most of their festival purses and had not the old man come in with a whoobub against his daughter and the king's son and scared my choughs from the chaff, i had not left a purse alive in the whole army.
nay, but my letters, by this means being there so soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
and those that you'll procure from king leontes shall satisfy your father.
happy be you!
all that you speak shows fair.
who have we here?
we'll make an instrument of this, omit nothing may give us aid.
if they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
how now, good fellow!
why shakest thou so?
fear not, man here's no harm intended to thee.
i am a poor fellow, sir.
why, be so still here's nobody will steal that from yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange therefore discase thee instantly, thou must think there's a necessity in't,and though the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot.
i am a poor fellow, sir.
i know ye well enough.
nay, prithee, the gentleman is half flayed already.
are you in earnest, sir?
i smell the trick on't.
dispatch, i prithee.
indeed, but i cannot with conscience take it.
unbuckle, unbuckle.
fortunate mistress,let my prophecy come home to ye!
you must retire yourself take your sweetheart's hat and pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face, dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken the truth of your own seeming that you may for i do fear eyes overto shipboard get undescried.
i see the play so lies that i must bear a part.
no remedy.
have you done there?
should i now meet my father, he would not call me son.
nay, you shall have no hat.
come, lady, come.
farewell, my friend.
adieu, sir.
o perdita, what have we twain forgot!
pray you, a word.
fortune speed us!
thus we set on, camillo, to the seaside.
the swifter speed the better.
i understand the business, to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a cutpurse a good nose is requisite also, to smell out work for the other senses.
i see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
what an exchange had this been without boot!
what a boot is here with this exchange!
sure the gods do this year connive at us, and we may do any thing extempore.
the prince himself is about a piece of iniquity, stealing away from his father with his if i thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the king withal, i would not do' i hold it the more knavery to conceal it and therein am i constant to my profession.
aside, aside every lane's end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man work.
see, see what a man you are now!
there is no other way but to tell the king she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
nay, but hear me.
nay, but hear me.
go to, then.
she being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the king and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him.
show those things you found about her, those secret things, this being done, i warrant you.
i will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his son's pranks too who, i may say, is no honest man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make me the king's brotherinlaw.
indeed, brotherinlaw was the farthest off you could have been to him and then your blood had been the dearer by i know how much an ounce.
well, there is that in this fardel will make him scratch his beard.
pray heartily he be at palace.
to the palace, an it like your worship.
your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover.
we are but plain fellows, sir.
a lie you are rough and hairy.
let me have no it becomes none but tradesmen, and they but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel therefore they do not give us the lie.
your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken yourself with the manner.
are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
whether it like me or no, i am a courtier.
seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose courtodor from me?
reflect i not on thy baseness courtcontempt?
thinkest thou, for that i insinuate, or toaze from thee thy business, i am therefore no courtier?
i am courtier capape and one that will either push on or pluck whereupon i command thee to open thy affair.
my business, sir, is to the king.
what advocate hast thou to him?
i know not, an't like you.
advocate's the court say you have none.
none, sir i have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
how blessed are we that are not simple men!
yet nature might have made me as these are, therefore i will not disdain.
this cannot be but a great courtier.
his garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
a great man, i'll warrant i know by the picking on's teeth.
the fardel there?
what's i' the fardel?
wherefore that box?
sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box, which none must know but the king and which he shall know within this hour, if i may come to the speech of him.
age, thou hast lost thy labour.
why, sir?
the king is not at the palace he is gone aboard a for, if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must know the king is full of grief.
so 'tis said, sir about his son, that should have married a shepherd's daughter.
if that shepherd be not in handfast, the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
think you so, sir?
not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and vengeance bitter but those that are germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall all come which though it be great pity, yet it is necessary.
an old sheepwhistling rogue a ramtender, to offer to have his daughter come into grace!
some say he shall be stoned but that death is too soft for him, say i draw our throne into a sheepcote!
all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear.
an't like you, sir?
he has a son, who shall be flayed alive then 'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead then recovered again with aquavitae or some other hot infusion then, raw as he is, and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall be be set against a brickwall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death.
but what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital?
tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men, being something gently considered, i'll bring you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs and if it be in man besides the king to effect your suits, here is man shall do it.
close with him, give him gold and though authority be a stubborn bear, show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado.
remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.
' an't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us, i'll make it as much more and leave this young man in pawn till i bring it you.
after i have done what i promised?
ay, sir.
well, give me the moiety.
are you a party in this business?
in some sort, but though my case be a pitiful one, i hope i shall not be flayed out of it.
o, that's the case of the shepherd' hang him, he'll be made an example.
comfort, good comfort!
we must to the king and show he must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister we are gone else.
sir, i will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be brought you.
i will trust you.
walk before toward the seaside i will but look upon the hedge and follow you.
we are blest in this man, as i may say, even blest.
let' he was provided to do us good.
if i had a mind to be honest, i see fortune would she drops booties in my mouth.
i am courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means to do the prince my master good which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement?
i will bring these two moles, these blind ones, if he think it fit to shore them again and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far officious for i am proof against that title and what shame else belongs to't.
to him will i present there may be matter in it.
sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd a saint no fault could you make, which you have not redeem'd indeed, paid down at the last, do as the heavens have done, forget your evil with them forgive yourself.
whilst i remember her and her virtues, i cannot forget my blemishes in them, and so still think of the wrong i did myself which was so much, that heirless it hath made my kingdom and destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man bred his hopes out of.
true, too true, if, one by one, you wedded all the world, or from the all that are took something good, to make a perfect woman, she you kill'd would be unparallel'd.
i think so.
kill'd!
she i kill'd!
but thou strikest me sorely, to say i did it is as bitter now, good now, say so but seldom.
not at all, you might have spoken a thousand things that would have done the time more benefit and graced your kindness better.
you are one of those would have him wed again.
if you would not so, you pity not the state, nor the remembrance of his most sovereign name consider little what dangers, by his highness' fail of issue, may drop upon his kingdom and devour incertain lookers on.
what were more holy than to rejoice the former queen is well?
what holier than, for royalty's repair, for present comfort and for future good, to bless the bed of majesty again with a sweet fellow to't?
there is none worthy, respecting her that's gone.
besides, the gods will have fulfill'd their secret purposes for has not the divine apollo said, is't not the tenor of his oracle, that king leontes shall not have an heir till his lost child be found?
which that it shall, is all as monstrous to our human reason as my antigonus to break his grave and come again to me who, on my life, did perish with the infant.
'tis your counsel my lord should to the heavens be contrary, oppose against their wills.
care not for issue great alexander left his to the worthiest so his successor was like to be the best.
good paulina, who hast the memory of hermione, i know, in honour, o, that ever i had squared me to thy counsel!
then, even now, i might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes, have taken treasure from her lips and left them more rich for what they yielded.
thou speak'st truth.
no more such wives therefore, one worse, and better used, would make her sainted spirit again possess her corpse, and on this stage, where we're offenders now, appear soulvex'd, and begin, 'why to me?
' had she such power, she had just cause.
she had and would incense me to murder her i married.
i should so.
were i the ghost that walk'd, i'ld bid you mark her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't you chose her then i'ld shriek, that even your ears should rift to hear me and the words that follow'd should be 'remember mine.
' stars, stars, and all eyes else dead coals!
fear thou no wife i'll have no wife, paulina.
will you swear never to marry but by my free leave?
never, paulina so be blest my spirit!
then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
you tempt him overmuch.
unless another, as like hermione as is her picture, affront his eye.
good madam, i have done.
yet, if my lord will marry,if you will, sir, no remedy, but you will,give me the office she shall not be so young as was your former but she shall be such as, walk'd your first queen's ghost, it should take joy to see her in your arms.
my true paulina, we shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
that shall be when your first queen's again in breath never till then.
one that gives out himself prince florizel, son of polixenes, with his princess, she the fairest i have yet beheld, desires access to your high presence.
what with him?
he comes not like to his father' his approach, so out of circumstance and sudden, tells us 'tis not a visitation framed, but forced by need and accident.
what train?
but few, and those but mean.
his princess, say you, with him?
ay, the most peerless piece of earth, i think, that e'er the sun shone bright on.
o hermione, as every present time doth boast itself above a better gone, so must thy grave give way to what's seen now!
sir, you yourself have said and writ so, but your writing now is colder than that theme, 'she had not been, nor was not to be equall'd'thus your verse flow' 'tis shrewdly ebb'd, to say you have seen a better.
pardon, the one i have almost forgot,your pardon, the other, when she has obtain'd your eye, will have your tongue too.
this is a creature, would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal of all professors else, make proselytes of who she but bid follow.
how!
not women?
women will love her, that she is a woman more worth than any man men, that she is the rarest of all women.
go, cleomenes yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends, bring them to our embracement.
still, 'tis strange he thus should steal upon us.
had our prince, jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd there was not full a month between their births.
prithee, no more cease thou know'st he dies to me again when talk' sure, when i shall see this gentleman, thy speeches will bring me to consider that which may unfurnish me of reason.
they are come.
your mother was most true to wedlock, prince for she did print your royal father off, were i but twentyone, your father's image is so hit in you, his very air, that i should call you brother, as i did him, and speak of something wildly by us perform'd before.
most dearly welcome!
and your fair princess,goddess!
o, alas!
i lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth might thus have stood begetting wonder as you, gracious couple, and then i lost all mine own follythe society, amity too, of your brave father, whom, though bearing misery, i desire my life once more to look on him.
by his command have i here touch'd sicilia and from him give you all greetings that a king, at friend, and, but infirmity which waits upon worn times hath something seized his wish'd ability, he had himself the lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his measured to look upon you whom he loves he bade me say somore than all the sceptres and those that bear them living.
o my brother, good gentleman!
the wrongs i have done thee stir afresh within me, and these thy offices, so rarely kind, are as interpreters of my behindhand slackness.
welcome hither, as is the spring to the earth.
and hath he too exposed this paragon to the fearful usage, at least ungentle, of the dreadful neptune, to greet a man not worth her pains, much less the adventure of her person?
good my lord, she came from libya.
where the warlike smalus, that noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
most royal sir, from thence from him, whose daughter his tears proclaim'd his, thence, a prosperous southwind friendly, we have cross'd, to execute the charge my father gave me my best train i have from your sicilian shores dismiss'd who for bohemia bend, to signify not only my success in libya, sir, but my arrival and my wife's in safety here where we are.
the blessed gods purge all infection from our air whilst you do climate here!
you have a holy father, a graceful gentleman against whose person, so sacred as it is, for which the heavens, taking angry note, have left me issueless and your father's blest, as he from heaven merits it, with you worthy his goodness.
what might i have been, might i a son and daughter now have look'd on, such goodly things as you!
most noble sir, that which i shall report will bear no credit, were not the proof so nigh.
please you, great sir, bohemia greets you from himself by me desires you to attach his son, who has his dignity and duty both cast off fled from his father, from his hopes, and with a shepherd's daughter.
where's bohemia?
speak.
here in your city i speak amazedly and it becomes my marvel and my message.
to your court whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems, of this fair couple, meets he on the way the father of this seeming lady and her brother, having both their country quitted with this young prince.
camillo has betray'd me whose honour and whose honesty till now endured all weathers.
lay' he's with the king your father.
who?
camillo?
camillo, sir i spake with him who now has these poor men in question.
never saw i they kneel, they kiss the earth bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them with divers deaths in death.
o my poor father!
the heaven sets spies upon us, will not have our contract celebrated.
you are married?
we are not, sir, nor are we like to be the stars, i see, the odds for high and low's alike.
my lord, is this the daughter of a king?
she is, when once she is my wife.
that 'once' i see by your good father's speed will come on very slowly.
i am sorry, most sorry, you have broken from his liking where you were tied in duty, and as sorry your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty, that you might well enjoy her.
dear, though fortune, visible an enemy, should chase us with my father, power no jot hath she to change our loves.
beseech you, sir, remember since you owed no more to time with thought of such affections, step forth mine advocate at your request my father will grant precious things as trifles.
would he do so, i'ld beg your precious mistress, which he counts but a trifle.
sir, my liege, your eye hath too much youth in' not a month 'fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes than what you look on now.
i thought of her, even in these looks i made.
but your petition is yet unanswer'd.
your honour not o'erthrown by your desires, upon which errand i now go toward him therefore follow me come, good my lord.
beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
i was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all commanded out of the chamber only this methought i heard the shepherd say, he found the child.
i would most gladly know the issue of it.
i make a broken delivery of the business but the changes i perceived in the king and camillo were they seemed almost, with staring on one another, to tear the cases of their eyes there was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, a notable passion of wonder appeared in them but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.
here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
the news, rogero?
the oracle is fulfilled the king' such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that balladmakers cannot be able to express it.
here comes the lady paulina' he can deliver you more.
how goes it now, sir?
this news which is called true is so like an old tale, that has the king found his heir?
most true, if ever truth were pregnant by that which you hear you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs.
the mantle of queen hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it, the letters of antigonus found with it which they know to be his character, the majesty of the creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the king's daughter.
did you see the meeting of the two kings?
then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of.
there might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner that it seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their joy waded in tears.
there was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour.
our king, being ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that joy were now become a loss, cries 'o, thy mother, thy mother!
' then asks bohemia forgiveness then embraces his soninlaw then again worries he his daughter with clipping her now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by like a weatherbitten conduit of many kings' reigns.
i never heard of such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it.
what, pray you, became of antigonus, that carried hence the child?
like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open.
this avouches the shepherd's son who has not only his innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a handkerchief and rings of his that paulina knows.
what became of his bark and his followers?
wrecked the same instant of their master's death and so that all the instruments which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was found.
but o, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in paulina!
she had one eye declined for the loss of her husband, another elevated that the oracle was she lifted the princess from the earth, and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart that she might no more be in danger of losing.
the dignity of this act was worth the audience of kings and princes for by such was it acted.
one of the prettiest touches of all and that which angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's death, with the manner how she came to't bravely confessed and lamented by the king, how attentiveness wounded his daughter till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'alas,' i would fain say, bleed tears, for i am sure my heart wept blood.
who was most marble there changed colour some swooned, if all the world could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.
are they returned to the court?
the princess hearing of her mother's statue, which is in the keeping of paulina,a piece many years in doing and now newly performed by that rare italian master, julio romano, who, had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work, would beguile nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her he so near to hermione hath done hermione that they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of thither with all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
i thought she had some great matter there in hand for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of hermione, visited that removed house.
shall we thither and with our company piece the rejoicing?
who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
let's along.
now, had i not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop on my head.
i brought the old told him i heard but he at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter, so he then took her to be, who began to be much seasick, and himself little better, extremity of weather continuing, this mystery remained undiscovered.
but 'tis all one to me for had i been the finder out of this secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.
here come those i have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
come, boy i am past moe children, but thy sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born.
you are well met, sir.
you denied to fight with me this other day, because i was no gentleman born.
see you these clothes?
say you see them not and you were best say give me the lie, do, and try whether i am not now a gentleman born.
i know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
and so have i, boy.
but i was a gentleman born before my father for the king's son took me by the hand, and called me brother and then the two kings called my father brother and then the prince my brother and the princess my sister called my father father and so we wept, and there was the first gentlemanlike tears that ever we shed.
we may live, son, to shed many more.
ay or else 'twere hard luck, being in so preposterous estate as we are.
i humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults i have committed to your worship and to give me your good report to the prince my master.
prithee, son, do for we must be gentle, now we are gentlemen.
thou wilt amend thy life?
ay, an it like your good worship.
i will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in bohemia.
you may say it, but not swear it.
not swear it, now i am a gentleman?
let boors and franklins say it, i'll swear it.
how if it be false, son?
if it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear and i'll swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk but i know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be but i'll swear it, and i would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.
i will prove so, sir, to my power.
ay, if i do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not.
hark!
the kings and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the queen's picture.
come, we'll be thy good masters.
o grave and good paulina, the great comfort that i have had of thee!
what, sovereign sir, i did not well i meant well.
all my services but that you have vouchsafed, with your crown'd brother and these your contracted heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit, it is a surplus of your grace, which never my life may last to answer.
o paulina, but we came your gallery have we pass'd through, not without much content in many singularities but we saw not that which my daughter came to look upon, the statue of her mother.
as she lived peerless, so her dead likeness, i do well believe, excels whatever yet you look'd upon or hand of man hath done therefore i keep it lonely, apart.
prepare to see the life as lively mock'd as ever still sleep mock' behold, and say 'tis well.
i like your silence, it the more shows off but yet speak first, you, my liege, comes it not something near?
her natural posture!
chide me, dear stone, that i may say indeed thou art hermione or rather, thou art she in thy not chiding, for she was as tender as infancy and grace.
but yet, paulina, hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing so aged as this seems.
o, not by much.
so much the more our carver's excellence which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her as she lived now.
as now she might have done, so much to my good comfort, as it is now piercing to my soul.
o, thus she stood, even with such life of majesty, warm life, as now it coldly stands, when first i woo'd her!
does not the stone rebuke me for being more stone than it?
o royal piece, there's magic in thy majesty, which has my evils conjured to remembrance and from thy admiring daughter took the spirits, standing like stone with thee.
and give me leave, and do not say 'tis superstition, that i kneel and then implore her blessing.
lady, dear queen, that ended when i but began, give me that hand of yours to kiss.
o, patience!
the statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's not dry.
my lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on, which sixteen winters cannot blow away, so many summers dry scarce any joy did ever so long live no sorrow but kill'd itself much sooner.
dear my brother, let him that was the cause of this have power to take off so much grief from you as he will piece up in himself.
indeed, my lord, if i had thought the sight of my poor image would thus have wrought you,for the stone is mine i'ld not have show'd it.
do not draw the curtain.
no longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy may think anon it moves.
let be, let be.
would i were dead, but that, methinks, already what was he that did make it?
see, my lord, would you not deem it breathed?
and that those veins did verily bear blood?
the very life seems warm upon her lip.
the fixture of her eye has motion in't, as we are mock'd with art.
i' my lord's almost so far transported that he'll think anon it lives.
o sweet paulina, make me to think so twenty years together!
no settled senses of the world can match the pleasure of that madness.
let 't alone.
i am sorry, sir, i have thus far stirr' but i could afflict you farther.
do, paulina for this affliction has a taste as sweet as any cordial comfort.
still, methinks, what fine chisel could ever yet cut breath?
let no man mock me, for i will kiss her.
good my lord, the ruddiness upon her lip is wet you'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own with oily painting.
shall i draw the curtain?
no, not these twenty years.
so long could i stand by, a looker on.
either forbear, quit presently the chapel, or resolve you for more amazement.
if you can behold it, i'll make the statue move indeed, descend and take you by the hand but then you'll think which i protest againsti am assisted by wicked powers.
what you can make her do, what to speak, i am content to hear for 'tis as easy to make her speak as move.
it is required you do awake your faith.
then all stand still those that think it is unlawful business i am about, let them depart.
no foot shall stir.
music, awake her strike!
'tis time descend be stone no more approach strike all that look upon with marvel.
come, i' stir, nay, come away, bequeath to death your numbness, for from him dear life redeems you.
start not her actions shall be holy as do not shun her until you see her die again for then you kill her double.
nay, when she was young you woo'd her now in age is she become the suitor?
o, she's warm!
if this be magic, let it be an art lawful as eating.
she embraces him.
if she pertain to life let her speak too.
ay, and make't manifest where she has lived, or how stolen from the dead.
that she is living, were it but told you, should be hooted at but it appears she lives, though yet she speak not.
mark a little while.
please you to interpose, kneel and pray your mother's blessing.
turn, good lady our perdita is found.
you gods, look down and from your sacred vials pour your graces upon my daughter's head!
tell me, mine own.
where hast thou been preserved?
where lived?
how found thy father's court?
for thou shalt hear that i, knowing by paulina that the oracle gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved myself to see the issue.
there's time enough for that lest they desire upon this push to trouble your joys with like relation.
go together, you precious winners all your exultation partake to every one.
i, an old turtle, will wing me to some wither'd bough and there my mate, that's never to be found again, lament till i am lost.
o, peace, paulina!
thou shouldst a husband take by my consent, this is a match, and made between's by vows.
thou hast found mine but how, is to be question'd for i saw her, as i thought, dead, and have in vain said many a prayer upon her grave.
i'll not seek far for him, i partly know his mindto find thee an honourable husband.
come, camillo, and take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty is richly noted and here justified by us, a pair of kings.
let's from this place.
what!
both your pardons, that e'er i put between your holy looks my ill suspicion.
this is your soninlaw, and son unto the king, who, heavens directing, is trothplight to your daughter.
good paulina, lead us from hence, where we may leisurely each one demand an answer to his part perform'd in this wide gap of time since first we were dissever' hastily lead away.
escalus.
my lord.
of government the properties to unfold, would seem in me to affect speech and discourse since i am put to know that your own science exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice then no more remains, but that to your sufficiency, as your worth is able, and let them work.
the nature of our people, our city's institutions, and the terms for common justice, you're as pregnant in as art and practise hath enriched any that we remember.
there is our commission, from which we would not have you warp.
call hither, i say, bid come before us angelo.
what figure of us think you he will bear?
for you must know, we have with special soul elected him our absence to supply, lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love, and given his deputation all the organs what think you of it?
if any in vienna be of worth to undergo such ample grace and honour, it is lord angelo.
look where he comes.
always obedient to your grace's will, i come to know your pleasure.
angelo, there is a kind of character in thy life, that to the observer doth thy history fully unfold.
thyself and thy belongings are not thine own so proper as to waste thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
heaven doth with us as we with torches do, not light them for themselves for if our virtues did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike as if we had them not.
spirits are not finely touch'd but to fine issues, nor nature never lends the smallest scruple of her excellence but, like a thrifty goddess, she determines herself the glory of a creditor, both thanks and use.
but i do bend my speech to one that can my part in him advertise hold therefore, in our remove be thou at full ourself mortality and mercy in vienna old escalus, though first in question, is thy secondary.
take thy commission.
now, good my lord, let there be some more test made of my metal, before so noble and so great a figure be stamp'd upon it.
we have with a leaven'd and prepared choice proceeded to you therefore take your honours.
our haste from hence is of so quick condition that it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd matters of needful value.
we shall write to you, as time and our concernings shall importune, how it goes with us, and do look to know what doth befall you here.
so, fare you well to the hopeful execution do i leave you of your commissions.
yet give leave, my lord, that we may bring you something on the way.
my haste may not admit it nor need you, on mine honour, have to do with any scruple your scope is as mine own so to enforce or qualify the laws as to your soul seems good.
i'll privily away.
i love the people, through it do well, i do not relish well their loud applause and aves vehement nor do i think the man of safe discretion that does affect it.
once more, fare you well.
the heavens give safety to your purposes!
lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
i thank you.
fare you well.
i shall desire you, sir, to give me leave to have free speech with you and it concerns me a power i have, but of what strength and nature i am not yet instructed.
'tis so with me.
let us withdraw together, and we may soon our satisfaction have touching that point.
i'll wait upon your honour.
if the duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the king of hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the king.
heaven grant us its peace, but not the king of hungary's!
amen.
thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the ten commandments, but scraped one out of the table.
'thou shalt not steal'?
ay, that he razed.
why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and they put forth to steal.
there's not a soldier of us all, that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.
i never heard any soldier dislike it.
i believe thee for i think thou never wast where grace was said.
a dozen times at least.
what, in metre?
in any proportion or in any language.
i think, or in any religion.
ay, why not?
grace is grace, despite of all as, for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.
well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
i grant as there may between the lists and the velvet.
thou art the list.
thou art good velvet thou'rt a threepiled piece, i had as lief be a list of an english kersey as be piled, as thou art piled, for a french velvet.
do i speak feelingly now?
i think thou dost and, indeed, with most painful i will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health but, whilst i live, forget to drink after thee.
i think i have done myself wrong, have i not?
yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.
behold, behold.
where madam mitigation comes!
i have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to to what, i pray?
judge.
to three thousand dolours a year.
ay, and more.
a french crown more.
thou art always figuring diseases in me but thou art full of error i am sound.
nay, not as one would say, healthy but so sound as thy bones are hollow impiety has made a feast of thee.
how now!
which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?
well, well there's one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five thousand of you all.
who's that, i pray thee?
marry, sir, that's claudio, signior claudio.
claudio to prison?
'tis not so.
nay, but i know ' i saw him arrested, saw him carried away and, which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.
but, after all this fooling, i would not have it so.
art thou sure of this?
and it is for getting madam julietta with child.
believe me, he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in promisekeeping.
besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose.
but, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.
away!
let's go learn the truth of it.
thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows and what with poverty, i am customshrunk.
how now!
what's the news with you?
yonder man is carried to prison.
well what has he done?
a woman.
but what's his offence?
groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
what, is there a maid with child by him?
no, but there's a woman with maid by him.
you have not heard of the proclamation, have you?
what proclamation, man?
all houses in the suburbs of vienna must be plucked down.
and what shall become of those in the city?
they had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.
but shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?
to the ground, mistress.
why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
what shall become of me?
come good counsellors lack no though you change your place, you need not change your trade i'll be your tapster still.
courage!
you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.
what's to do here, thomas tapster?
let's withdraw.
here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to prison and there's madam juliet.
fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
bear me to prison, where i am committed.
i do it not in evil disposition, but from lord angelo by special charge.
thus can the demigod authority make us pay down for our offence by weight the words of heaven on whom it will, it will on whom it will not, so yet still 'tis just.
why, how now, claudio!
whence comes this restraint?
from too much liberty, my lucio, as surfeit is the father of much fast, so every scope by the immoderate use turns to restraint.
our natures do pursue, like rats that ravin down their proper bane, a thirsty evil and when we drink we die.
if could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would and yet, to say the truth, i had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
what's thy offence, claudio?
what but to speak of would offend again.
what, is't murder?
lechery?
call it so.
away, sir!
you must go.
one word, good friend.
lucio, a word with you.
a hundred, if they'll do you any good.
is lechery so look'd after?
upon a true contract i got possession of julietta' you know the lady she is fast my wife, save that we do the denunciation lack this we came not to, only for propagation of a dower remaining in the coffer of her friends, from whom we thought it meet to hide our love till time had made them for us.
but it chances the stealth of our most mutual entertainment with character too gross is writ on juliet.
with child, perhaps?
unhappily, even so.
and the new deputy now for the duke whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness, or whether that the body public be a horse whereon the governor doth ride, who, newly in the seat, that it may know he can command, lets it straight feel the spur whether the tyranny be in his place, or in his emmence that fills it up, but this new governor awakes me all the enrolled penalties which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round and none of them been worn and, for a name, now puts the drowsy and neglected act 'tis surely for a name.
and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off.
send after the duke and appeal to him.
i have done so, but he's not to be found.
i prithee, lucio, this day my sister should the cloister enter implore her, in my voice, that she make friends to the strict deputy i have great hope in that for in her youth there is a prone and speechless dialect, such as move men beside, she hath prosperous art when she will play with reason and discourse, and well she can persuade.
i pray she may as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who i would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of ticktack.
i'll to her.
i thank you, good friend lucio.
within two hours.
come, officer, away!
no, holy father throw away that thought believe not that the dribbling dart of love can pierce a complete bosom.
why i desire thee to give me secret harbour, hath a purpose more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends of burning youth.
may your grace speak of it?
my holy sir, none better knows than you how i have ever loved the life removed and held in idle price to haunt assemblies where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.
i have deliver'd to lord angelo, a man of stricture and firm abstinence, my absolute power and place here in vienna, and he supposes me travell'd to poland for so i have strew'd it in the common ear, and so it is received.
now, pious sir, you will demand of me why i do this?
gladly, my lord.
we have strict statutes and most biting laws.
the needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, which for this nineteen years we have let slip even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, that goes not out to prey.
now, as fond fathers, having bound up the threatening twigs of birch, only to stick it in their children's sight for terror, not to use, in time the rod becomes more mock'd than fear'd so our decrees, dead to infliction, to themselves are dead and liberty plucks justice by the nose the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart goes all decorum.
it rested in your grace to unloose this tied and it in you more dreadful would have seem'd than in lord angelo.
i do fear, sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope, 'twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them for we bid this be done, when evil deeds have their permissive pass and not the punishment.
therefore indeed, my father, i have on angelo imposed the office who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, and yet my nature never in the fight to do in slander.
and to behold his sway, i will, as 'twere a brother of your order, therefore, i prithee, supply me with the habit and instruct me how i may formally in person bear me like a true friar.
more reasons for this action at our more leisure shall i render you only, lord angelo is precise stands at a guard with envy scarce confesses that his blood flows, or that his appetite hence shall we see, if power change purpose, what our seemers be.
and have you nuns no farther privileges?
are not these large enough?
yes, truly i speak not as desiring more but rather wishing a more strict restraint upon the sisterhood, the votarists of saint clare.
who's that which calls?
it is a man's voice.
gentle isabella, turn you the key, and know his business of him you may, i may not you are yet unsworn.
when you have vow'd, you must not speak with men then, if you speak, you must not show your face, or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
he calls again i pray you, answer him.
peace and prosperity!
who is't that calls hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheekroses proclaim you are no less!
can you so stead me as bring me to the sight of isabella, a novice of this place and the fair sister to her unhappy brother claudio?
why 'her unhappy brother'?
let me ask, the rather for i now must make you know i am that isabella and his sister.
gentle and fair, not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
woe me!
for what?
for that which, if myself might be his judge, he hath got his friend with child.
sir, make me not your story.
it is true.
i would notthough 'tis my familiar sin with maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, tongue far from heart i hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.
by your renouncement an immortal spirit, and to be talk'd with in sincerity, as with a saint.
you do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
do not believe it.
fewness and truth, ' as those that feed grow full, as blossoming time that from the seedness the bare fallow brings to teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
some one with child by him?
my cousin juliet?
is she your cousin?
adoptedly as schoolmaids change their names by vain though apt affection.
she it is.
o, let him marry her.
this is the point.
the duke is very strangely gone from hence bore many gentlemen, myself being one, but we do learn by those that know the very nerves of state, his givingsout were of an infinite distance from his truemeant design.
upon his place, and with full line of his authority, governs lord angelo a man whose blood is very snowbroth one who never feels the wanton stings and motions of the sense, but doth rebate and blunt his natural edge with profits of the mind, study and fast.
heto give fear to use and liberty, which have for long run by the hideous law, as mice by lionshath pick'd out an act, under whose heavy sense your brother's life he arrests him on it and follows close the rigour of the statute, to make him an example.
all hope is gone, unless you have the grace by your fair prayer and that's my pith of business 'twixt you and your poor brother.
doth he so seek his life?
has censured him already and, as i hear, the provost hath a warrant for his execution.
alas!
what poor ability's in me to do him good?
assay the power you have.
my power?
alas, i doubt our doubts are traitors and make us lose the good we oft might win by fearing to attempt.
go to lord angelo, and let him learn to know, when maidens sue, men give like gods but when they weep and kneel, all their petitions are as freely theirs as they themselves would owe them.
i'll see what i can do.
but speedily.
i will about it straight no longer staying but to give the mother notice of my affair.
soon at night i'll send him certain word of my success.
i take my leave of you.
good sir, adieu.
we must not make a scarecrow of the law, setting it up to fear the birds of prey, and let it keep one shape, till custom make it their perch and not their terror.
ay, but yet let us be keen, and rather cut a little, than fall, and bruise to death.
alas, this gentleman whom i would save, had a most noble father!
let but your honour know, whom i believe to be most strait in virtue, that, in the working of your own affections, had time cohered with place or place with wishing, or that the resolute acting of your blood could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose, whether you had not sometime in your life err'd in this point which now you censure him, and pull'd the law upon you.
'tis one thing to be tempted, escalus, another thing to fall.
i not deny, the jury, passing on the prisoner's life, may in the sworn twelve have a thief or two guiltier than him they try.
what's open made to justice, what know the laws that thieves do pass on thieves?
'tis very pregnant, the jewel that we find, we stoop and take't because we see it but what we do not see we tread upon, and never think of it.
you may not so extenuate his offence for i have had such faults but rather tell me, when i, that censure him, do so offend, let mine own judgment pattern out my death, and nothing come in partial.
sir, he must die.
be it as your wisdom will.
where is the provost?
here, if it like your honour.
see that claudio be executed by nine to bring him his confessor, let him be prepared for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
come, if these be good people in a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses, bring them away.
how now, sir!
what's your name?
and what's the matter?
if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's constable, i do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
benefactors?
well what benefactors are they?
are they not malefactors?
if it?
please your honour, i know not well what they but precise villains they are, that i am sure of and void of all profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
this comes off well here's a wise officer.
what quality are they of?
elbow is your name?
why dost thou not speak, elbow?
he cannot, sir he's out at elbow.
what are you, sir?
he, sir!
a tapster, sir parcelbawd one that serves a bad woman whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs and now she professes a hothouse, which, i think, is a very ill house too.
how know you that?
my wife, sir, whom i detest before heaven and your honour, how?
thy wife?
ay, sir whom, i thank heaven, is an honest woman, dost thou detest her therefore?
i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.
how dost thou know that, constable?
marry, sir, by my wife who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
by the woman's means?
ay, sir, by mistress overdone' but as she spit in his face, so she defied him.
sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man prove it.
do you hear how he misplaces?
sir, she came in great with child and longing, saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruitdish, a dish of some threepence your honours have seen such dishes they are not china dishes, but very good dishes, go to, no matter for the dish, sir.
no, indeed, sir, not of a pin you are therein in but to the point.
as i say, this mistress elbow, being, as i say, with child, and being greatbellied, and longing, as i said, for prunes and having but two in the dish, as i said, master froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as i said, and, as i say, paying for them very honestly for, as you know, master froth, i could not give you threepence again.
no, indeed.
you being then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes, ay, so i did indeed.
why, very well i telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as i told you, all this is true.
why, very well, then, come, to the purpose.
what was done to elbow's wife, that he hath cause to complain of?
come me to what was done to her.
sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
no, sir, nor i mean it not.
sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.
and, i beseech you, look into master froth here, sir a man of fourscore pound a year whose was't not at hallowmas, master froth?
allhallond eve.
why, very well i hope here be truths.
he, sir, sitting, as i say, in a lower chair, sir 'twas in the bunch of grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?
i have so because it is an open room and good for winter.
why, very well, then i hope here be truths.
this will last out a night in russia, i'll take my leave.
and leave you to the hearing of the cause hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
i think no less.
good morrow to your lordship.
now, sir, what was done to elbow's wife, once more?
once, sir?
there was nothing done to her once.
i beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
i beseech your honour, ask me.
well, sir what did this gentleman to her?
i beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.
good master froth, look upon his honour 'tis for a good purpose.
doth your honour mark his face?
ay, sir, very well.
nay i beseech you, mark it well.
well, i do so.
doth your honour see any harm in his face?
why, no.
i'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him.
good, then if his face be the worst thing about him, how could master froth do the constable's wife any harm?
i would know that of your honour.
he's in the right.
constable, what say you to it?
first, an it like you, the house is a respected house next, this is a respected fellow and his mistress is a respected woman.
by this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us all.
varlet, thou liest thou liest, wicked varlet!
the time has yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.
sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.
which is the wiser here?
justice or iniquity?
is this true?
o thou caitiff!
o thou varlet!
o thou wicked hannibal!
i respected with her before i was married to her!
if ever i was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor duke's officer.
prove this, thou wicked hannibal, or i'll have mine action of battery on thee.
if he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your action of slander too.
marry, i thank your good worship for it.
what is't your worship's pleasure i shall do with this wicked caitiff?
truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are.
marry, i thank your worship for it.
thou seest, thou wicked varlet, now, what' thou art to continue now, thou varlet thou art to continue.
where were you born, friend?
here in vienna, sir.
are you of fourscore pounds a year?
yes, an't please you, sir.
what trade are you of, sir?
tapster a poor widow's tapster.
your mistress' name?
mistress overdone.
hath she had any more than one husband?
nine, sir overdone by the last.
nine!
come hither to me, master froth.
master froth, i would not have you acquainted with they will draw you, master froth, and you will hang them.
get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.
i thank your worship.
for mine own part, i never come into any room in a taphouse, but i am drawn in.
well, no more of it, farewell.
come you hither to me, master tapster.
what's your name, master tapster?
pompey.
what else?
bum, sir.
troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you so that in the beastliest sense you are pompey the great.
pompey, you are partly a bawd, pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not?
come, it shall be the better for you.
truly, sir, i am a poor fellow that would live.
how would you live, pompey?
by being a bawd?
what do you think of the trade, pompey?
is it a lawful trade?
if the law would allow it, sir.
but the law will not allow it, pompey nor it shall not be allowed in vienna.
does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?
no, pompey.
truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
if your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.
there are pretty orders beginning, it is but heading and hanging.
if you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a if this law hold in vienna ten year, i'll rent the fairest house in it after three if you live to see this come to pass, say pompey told you so.
thank you, good pompey and, in requital of your prophecy, i advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever no, if i do, pompey, i shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd caesar to you in plain dealing, pompey, i shall so, for this time, pompey, fare you well.
but i shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
whip me?
no, no the valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.
come hither to me, master elbow come hither, master constable.
how long have you been in this place of constable?
seven year and a half, sir.
i thought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time.
you say, seven years together?
and a half, sir.
alas, it hath been great pains to you.
they do you wrong to put you so oft upon ' are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?
faith, sir, as they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them i do it for some piece of money, and go through with all.
look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.
to your worship's house, sir?
to my house.
fare you well.
what's o'clock, think you?
eleven, sir.
i pray you home to dinner with me.
i humbly thank you.
it grieves me for the death of claudio but there's no remedy.
lord angelo is severe.
mercy is not itself, that oft looks so but yet,poor claudio!
there is no remedy.
come, sir.
he's hearing of a cause he will come straight i'll tell him of you.
pray you, do.
i'll know his pleasure may be he will relent.
alas, he hath but as offended in a dream!
all sects, all ages smack of this vice and he to die for't!
now, what's the matter.
provost?
is it your will claudio shall die tomorrow?
did not i tell thee yea?
hadst thou not order?
why dost thou ask again?
under your good correction, i have seen, when, after execution, judgment hath repented o'er his doom.
go to do you your office, or give up your place, and you shall well be spared.
i crave your honour's pardon.
what shall be done, sir, with the groaning juliet?
she's very near her hour.
dispose of her to some more fitter place, and that with speed.
here is the sister of the man condemn'd desires access to you.
hath he a sister?
ay, my good lord a very virtuous maid, and to be shortly of a sisterhood, if not already.
well, let her be admitted.
let have needful, but not lavish, means there shall be order for't.
god save your honour!
stay a little while.
you' what's your will?
i am a woeful suitor to your honour, please but your honour hear me.
well what's your suit?
there is a vice that most i do abhor, and most desire should meet the blow of justice for which i would not plead, but that i must for which i must not plead, but that i am at war 'twixt will and will not.
well the matter?
i have a brother is condemn' i do beseech you, let it be his fault, and not my brother.
condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
why, every fault's condemn' mine were the very cipher of a function, to fine the faults whose fine stands in record, and let go by the actor.
o just but severe law!
i had a brother, then.
heaven keep your honour!
must he needs die?
maiden, no remedy.
yes i do think that you might pardon him, and neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
i will not do't.
but can you, if you would?
look, what i will not, that i cannot do.
but might you do't, and do the world no wrong, if so your heart were touch'd with that remorse as mine is to him?
he's sentenced 'tis too late.
too late?
why, no i, that do speak a word.
may call it back again.
well, believe this, no ceremony that to great ones 'longs, not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword, the marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, become them with one half so good a grace as mercy does.
if he had been as you and you as he, you would have slipt like him but he, like you, would not have been so stern.
pray you, be gone.
i would to heaven i had your potency, and you were isabel!
should it then be thus?
no i would tell what 'twere to be a judge, and what a prisoner.
your brother is a forfeit of the law, and you but waste your words.
alas, alas!
why, all the souls that were were forfeit once and he that might the vantage best have took found out the remedy.
how would you be, if he, which is the top of judgment, should but judge you as you are?
o, think on that and mercy then will breathe within your lips, like man new made.
be you content, fair maid it is the law, were he my kinsman, brother, or my son, he must die tomorrow.
tomorrow!
o, that's sudden!
spare him, spare him!
he's not prepared for death.
even for our kitchens shall we serve heaven with less respect than we do minister to our gross selves?
good, good my lord, bethink you who is it that hath died for this offence?
there's many have committed it.
the law hath not been dead, those many had not dared to do that evil, if the first that did the edict infringe had answer' now 'tis awake takes note of what is done and, like a prophet, looks in a glass, that shows what future evils, either new, or by remissness newconceived, and so in progress to be hatch'd and born, are now to have no successive degrees, but, ere they live, to end.
yet show some pity.
i show it most of all when i show justice for then i pity those i do not know, which a dismiss'd offence would after gall and do him right that, answering one foul wrong, lives not to act another.
be satisfied your brother dies tomorrow be content.
so you must be the first that gives this sentence, and he, that suffer's.
o, it is excellent to have a giant's strength but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant.
could great men thunder as jove himself does, jove would ne'er be quiet, for every pelting, petty officer would use his heaven for thunder nothing but thunder!
merciful heaven, thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak but man, proud man, drest in a little brief authority, most ignorant of what he's most assured, his glassy essence, like an angry ape, plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven as make the angels weep who, with our spleens, would all themselves laugh mortal.
great men may jest with saints 'tis wit in them, but in the less foul profanation.
thou'rt i' the right, girl more o, that.
that in the captain's but a choleric word, which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
why do you put these sayings upon me?
because authority, though it err like others, hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, that skins the vice o' the top.
go to your bosom knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know that's like my brother' if it confess a natural guiltiness such as is his, let it not sound a thought upon your tongue against my brother's life.
gentle my lord, turn back.
come again tomorrow.
hark how i' good my lord, turn back.
how!
bribe me?
ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
not with fond shekels of the tested gold, or stones whose rates are either rich or poor as fancy values them but with true prayers that shall be up at heaven and enter there ere sunrise, prayers from preserved souls, from fasting maids whose minds are dedicate to nothing temporal.
well come to me tomorrow.
heaven keep your honour safe!
at what hour tomorrow shall i attend your lordship?
at any time 'fore noon.
'save your honour!
from thee, even from thy virtue!
what's this, what's this?
is this her fault or mine?
the tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
but it is i that, lying by the violet in the sun, do as the carrion does, not as the flower, corrupt with virtuous season.
can it be that modesty may more betray our sense than woman's lightness?
having waste ground enough, shall we desire to raze the sanctuary and pitch our evils there?
o, fie, fie, fie!
what dost thou, or what art thou, angelo?
dost thou desire her foully for those things that make her good?
o, let her brother live!
thieves for their robbery have authority when judges steal themselves.
what, do i love her, that i desire to hear her speak again, and feast upon her eyes?
what is't i dream on?
o cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint, with saints dost bait thy hook!
most dangerous is that temptation that doth goad us on never could the strumpet, with all her double vigour, art and nature, once stir my temper but this virtuous maid subdues me quite.
even till now, when men were fond, i smiled and wonder'd how.
hail to you, provost!
so i think you are.
i am the provost.
what's your will, good friar?
bound by my charity and my blest order, i come to visit the afflicted spirits here in the prison.
do me the common right to let me see them and to make me know the nature of their crimes, that i may minister to them accordingly.
i would do more than that, if more were needful.
look, a gentlewoman of mine, who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, hath blister' she is with child and he that got it, sentenced a young man more fit to do another such offence than die for this.
when must he die?
as i do think, tomorrow.
stay awhile, and you shall be conducted.
repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
i do and bear the shame most patiently.
i'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, and try your penitence, if it be sound, or hollowly put on.
i'll gladly learn.
love you the man that wrong'd you?
yes, as i love the woman that wrong'd him.
so then it seems your most offenceful act was mutually committed?
mutually.
then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
i do confess it, and repent it, father.
'tis meet so, but lest you do repent, as that the sin hath brought you to this shame, which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven, showing we would not spare heaven as we love it, but as we stand in fear, i do repent me, as it is an evil, and take the shame with joy.
there rest.
your partner, as i hear, must die tomorrow, and i am going with instruction to him.
grace go with you, benedicite!
must die tomorrow!
o injurious love, that respites me a life, whose very comfort is still a dying horror!
'tis pity of him.
when i would pray and think, i think and pray to several subjects.
heaven hath my empty words whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue, heaven in my mouth, as if i did but only chew his name and in my heart the strong and swelling evil of my conception.
the state, whereon i studied is like a good thing, being often read, grown fear'd and tedious yea, my gravity, whereinlet no man hear mei take pride, could i with boot change for an idle plume, which the air beats for vain.
o place, o form, how often dost thou with thy case, thy habit, wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls to thy false seeming!
blood, let's write good angel on the devil' 'tis not the devil's crest.
how now!
who's there?
one isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
teach her the way.
o heavens!
why does my blood thus muster to my heart, making both it unable for itself, and dispossessing all my other parts of necessary fitness?
so play the foolish throngs with one that swoons come all to help him, and so stop the air and even so the general, subject to a wellwish'd king, quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness crowd to his presence, where their untaught love must needs appear offence.
how now, fair maid?
i am come to know your pleasure.
that you might know it, would much better please me than to demand what 'tis.
your brother cannot live.
even so.
heaven keep your honour!
yet may he live awhile and, it may be, as long as you or i yet he must die.
under your sentence?
yea.
when, i beseech you?
that in his reprieve, longer or shorter, he may be so fitted that his soul sicken not.
fie, these filthy vices!
it were as good to pardon him that hath from nature stolen a man already made, as to remit their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image 'tis all as easy falsely to take away a life true made as to put metal in restrained means to make a false one.
'tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
say you so?
then i shall pose you quickly.
which had you rather, that the most just law now took your brother's life or, to redeem him, give up your body to such sweet uncleanness as she that he hath stain'd?
sir, believe this, i had rather give my body than my soul.
our compell'd sins stand more for number than for accompt.
how say you?
nay, i'll not warrant that for i can speak against the thing i say.
i, now the voice of the recorded law, pronounce a sentence on your brother' might there not be a charity in sin to save this brother's life?
please you to do't, i'll take it as a peril to my soul, it is no sin at all, but charity.
pleased you to do't at peril of your soul, were equal poise of sin and charity.
that i do beg his life, if it be sin, heaven let me bear it!
you granting of my suit, if that be sin, i'll make it my morn prayer to have it added to the faults of mine, and nothing of your answer.
nay, but hear me.
either you are ignorant, or seem so craftily and that's not good.
let me be ignorant, and in nothing good, but graciously to know i am no better.
thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright when it doth tax itself as these black masks proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder than beauty could, display'd.
but mark me to be received plain, i' your brother is to die.
and his offence is so, as it appears, accountant to the law upon that pain.
true.
admit no other way to save his life, as i subscribe not that, nor any other, but in the loss of question,that you, his sister, finding yourself desired of such a person, whose credit with the judge, or own great place, could fetch your brother from the manacles of the allbuilding law and that there were no earthly mean to save him, but that either you must lay down the treasures of your body to this supposed, or else to let him suffer what would you do?
that is, were i under the terms of death, the impression of keen whips i'ld wear as rubies, and strip myself to death, as to a bed that longing have been sick for, ere i'ld yield my body up to shame.
then must your brother die.
and ' better it were a brother died at once, than that a sister, by redeeming him, should die for ever.
were not you then as cruel as the sentence that you have slander'd so?
ignomy in ransom and free pardon lawful mercy is nothing kin to foul redemption.
you seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant and rather proved the sliding of your brother a merriment than a vice.
o, pardon me, my lord it oft falls out, to have what we would have, i something do excuse the thing i hate, for his advantage that i dearly love.
we are all frail.
else let my brother die, if not a feodary, but only he owe and succeed thy weakness.
nay, women are frail too.
ay, as the glasses where they view themselves which are as easy broke as they make forms.
women!
help heaven!
men their creation mar in profiting by them.
nay, call us ten times frail for we are soft as our complexions are, and credulous to false prints.
and from this testimony of your own sex, since i suppose we are made to be no stronger than faults may shake our frames,let me be bold i do arrest your words.
be that you are, that is, a woman if you be more, you're none if you be one, as you are well express'd by all external warrants, show it now, by putting on the destined livery.
gentle my lord, let me entreat you speak the former language.
plainly conceive, i love you.
my brother did love juliet, and you tell me that he shall die for it.
he shall not, isabel, if you give me love.
i know your virtue hath a licence in't, which seems a little fouler than it is, to pluck on others.
believe me, on mine honour, my words express my purpose.
little honour to be much believed, and most pernicious purpose!
seeming, seeming!
i will proclaim thee, angelo look for' sign me a present pardon for my brother, or with an outstretch'd throat i'll tell the world aloud what man thou art.
who will believe thee, isabel?
my unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life, my vouch against you, and my place i' the state, will so your accusation overweigh, that you shall stifle in your own report and smell of calumny.
i have begun, fit thy consent to my sharp appetite lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes, that banish what they sue for redeem thy brother by yielding up thy body to my will or else he must not only die the death, but thy unkindness shall his death draw out to lingering sufferance.
answer me tomorrow, or, by the affection that now guides me most, i'll prove a tyrant to him.
as for you, say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.
to whom should i complain?
did i tell this, who would believe me?
o perilous mouths, that bear in them one and the selfsame tongue, either of condemnation or approof bidding the law make court' hooking both right and wrong to the appetite, to follow as it draws!
i' though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood, yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
that, had he twenty heads to tender down on twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up, before his sister should her body stoop to such abhorr'd pollution.
then, isabel, live chaste, and, brother, more than our brother is our chastity.
i'll tell him yet of angelo's request, and fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.
so then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
the miserable have no other medicine i've hope to live, and am prepared to die.
be absolute for death either death or life shall thereby be the sweeter.
if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing a breath thou art, servile to all the skyey influences, that dost this habitation, where thou keep'st, merely, thou art death's fool for him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun and yet runn'st toward him still.
thou art not noble for all the accommodations that thou bear'st are nursed by baseness.
thou'rt by no means valiant for thou dost fear the soft and tender fork of a poor worm.
thy best of rest is sleep, and that thou oft provokest yet grossly fear'st thy death, which is no more.
thou art not thyself for thou exist'st on many a thousand grains that issue out of dust.
happy thou art not for what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get, and what thou hast, forget'st.
thou art not certain for thy complexion shifts to strange effects, after the moon.
if thou art rich, thou'rt poor for, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey, and death unloads thee.
friend hast thou none for thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, the mere effusion of thy proper loins, do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, for ending thee no sooner.
thou hast nor youth nor age, but, as it were, an afterdinner's sleep, dreaming on both for all thy blessed youth becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms of palsied eld and when thou art old and rich, thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, to make thy riches pleasant.
what's yet in this that bears the name of life?
yet in this life yet death we fear, that makes these odds all even.
i humbly thank you.
to sue to live, i find i seek to die and, seeking death, let it come on.
who's there?
the wish deserves a welcome.
dear sir, ere long i'll visit you again.
most holy sir, i thank you.
my business is a word or two with claudio.
and very welcome.
look, signior, here's your sister.
provost, a word with you.
as many as you please.
bring me to hear them speak, where i may be concealed.
now, sister, what's the comfort?
why, as all comforts are most good, most good indeed.
lord angelo, having affairs to heaven, intends you for his swift ambassador, therefore your best appointment make with speed tomorrow you set on.
is there no remedy?
none, but such remedy as, to save a head, to cleave a heart in twain.
but is there any?
yes, brother, there is a devilish mercy in the judge, if you'll implore it, that will free your life, but fetter you till death.
perpetual durance?
ay, just perpetual durance, a restraint, though all the world's vastidity you had, to a determined scope.
but in what nature?
in such a one as, you consenting to't, would bark your honour from that trunk you bear, and leave you naked.
let me know the point.
o, i do fear thee, claudio and i quake, lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain, and six or seven winters more respect than a perpetual honour.
darest thou die?
the sense of death is most in apprehension and the poor beetle, that we tread upon, in corporal sufferance finds a pang as great as when a giant dies.
why give you me this shame?
think you i can a resolution fetch from flowery tenderness?
if i must die, i will encounter darkness as a bride, and hug it in mine arms.
there spake my brother there my father's grave did utter forth a voice.
yes, thou art too noble to conserve a life in base appliances.
this outwardsainted deputy, whose settled visage and deliberate word nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew as falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil his filth within being cast, he would appear a pond as deep as hell.
the prenzie angelo!
o, 'tis the cunning livery of hell, the damned'st body to invest and cover in prenzie guards!
dost thou think, claudio?
if i would yield him my virginity, thou mightst be freed.
o heavens!
it cannot be.
yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence, so to offend him still.
this night's the time that i should do what i abhor to name, or else thou diest tomorrow.
thou shalt not do't.
o, were it but my life, i'ld throw it down for your deliverance as frankly as a pin.
thanks, dear isabel.
be ready, claudio, for your death tomorrow.
yes.
has he affections in him, that thus can make him bite the law by the nose, when he would force it?
sure, it is no sin, or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
which is the least?
if it were damnable, he being so wise, why would he for the momentary trick be perdurably fined?
o isabel!
what says my brother?
death is a fearful thing.
and shamed life a hateful.
ay, but to die, and go we know not where to lie in cold obstruction and to rot this sensible warm motion to become a kneaded clod and the delighted spirit to bathe in fiery floods, or to reside in thrilling region of thickribbed ice to be imprison'd in the viewless winds, and blown with restless violence round about the pendent world or to be worse than worst of those that lawless and incertain thought 'tis too horrible!
the weariest and most loathed worldly life that age, ache, penury and imprisonment can lay on nature is a paradise to what we fear of death.
alas, alas!
sweet sister, what sin you do to save a brother's life, nature dispenses with the deed so far that it becomes a virtue.
o you beast!
o faithless coward!
o dishonest wretch!
wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
is't not a kind of incest, to take life from thine own sister's shame?
what should i think?
heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
for such a warped slip of wilderness ne'er issued from his blood.
take my defiance!
die, perish!
might but my bending down reprieve thee from thy fate, i'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death, no word to save thee.
nay, hear me, isabel.
o, fie, fie, fie!
thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
'tis best thou diest quickly.
o hear me, isabella!
vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
what is your will?
might you dispense with your leisure, i would by and the satisfaction i would require is likewise your own benefit.
i have no superfluous leisure my stay must be stolen out of other affairs but i will attend you awhile.
son, i have overheard what hath passed between you and your sister.
angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her only he hath made an essay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition she, having the truth of honour in her, hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive.
i am confessor to angelo, and i know this to be true therefore prepare yourself to do not satisfy your resolution with hopes tomorrow you must die go to your knees and make ready.
let me ask my sister pardon.
i am so out of love with life that i will sue to be rid of it.
farewell.
provost, a word with you!
what's your will, father that now you are come, you will be gone.
leave me my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
in good time.
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair.
the assault that angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my understanding and, but that frailty hath examples for his falling, i should wonder at angelo.
how will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
i had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born.
but, o, how much is the good duke deceived in angelo!
if ever he return and i can speak to him, i will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.
yet, as the matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation he made trial of you only.
therefore fasten your ear on my to the love i have in doing good a remedy presents itself.
i do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit redeem your brother from the angry law do no stain to your own gracious person and much please the absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.
let me hear you speak farther.
i have spirit to do anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.
have you not heard speak of mariana, the sister of frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?
i have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.
she should this angelo have married was affianced to her by oath, between which time of the contract and limit of the solemnity, her brother frederick was wrecked at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his sister.
but mark how heavily this befell to the there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural with him, the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriagedowry with both, her combinate husband, this wellseeming angelo.
can this be so?
did angelo so leave her?
left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort swallowed his vows whole, in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.
what a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world!
what corruption in this life, that it will let this man live!
but how out of this can she avail?
and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.
show me how, good father.
this forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it more violent and unruly.
go you to angelo answer his requiring with a plausible obedience agree with his demands to the point only refer yourself to this advantage, first, that your stay with him may not be long that the time may have all shadow and silence in it and the place answer to convenience.
this being granted in course,and now follows all,we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your place if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to and here, by this, is your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled.
the maid will i frame and make fit for his attempt.
if you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
what think you of it?
the image of it gives me content already and i trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
it lies much in your holding up.
haste you speedily if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction.
i will presently to saint luke' there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana.
at that place call upon me and dispatch with angelo, that it may be quickly.
i thank you for this comfort.
fare you well, good father.
nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.
o heavens!
what stuff is here 'twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm and furred with fox and lambskins too, to signify, that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.
come your way, sir.
'bless you, good father friar.
and you, good brother father.
what offence hath this man made you, sir?
marry, sir, and, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
fie, sirrah!
a bawd, a wicked bawd!
the evil that thou causest to be done, that is thy means to live.
do thou but think what 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back say to thyself, from their abominable and beastly touches i drink, i eat, array myself, and live.
canst thou believe thy living is a life, so stinkingly depending?
go mend, go mend.
indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir but yet, sir, i would prove nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, thou wilt prove his.
take him to prison, correction and instruction must both work ere this rude beast will profit.
he must before the deputy, sir he has given him if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
that we were all, as some would seem to be, from our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
his neck will come to your waist,a cord, sir.
i spy comfort i cry bail.
here's a gentleman and a friend of mine.
how now, noble pompey!
what, at the wheels of caesar?
art thou led in triumph?
what, is there none of pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it clutch'd?
what reply, ha?
what sayest thou to this tune, matter and method?
is't not drowned i' the last rain, ha?
what sayest thou, trot?
is the world as it was, man?
which is the way?
is it sad, and few words?
or how?
the trick of it?
still thus, and thus still worse!
how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress?
procures she still, ha?
troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub.
why, 'tis good it is the right of it it must be an unshunned consequence it must be so.
art going to prison, pompey?
yes, faith, sir.
why, 'tis not amiss, pompey.
go, say i sent thee thither.
for debt, pompey?
or how?
for being a bawd, for being a bawd.
well, then, if imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, ' bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity too bawdborn.
farewell, good pompey.
commend me to the prison, you will turn good husband now, pompey you will keep the house.
i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
no, indeed, will i not, pompey it is not the wear.
i will pray, pompey, if you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more.
adieu, trusty pompey.
'bless you, friar.
and you.
does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
come your ways, sir come.
you will not bail me, then, sir?
then, pompey, nor now.
what news abroad, friar?
what news?
come your ways, sir come.
go to kennel, pompey go.
what news, friar, of the duke?
i know none.
can you tell me of any?
some say he is with the emperor of russia other some, but where is he, think you?
i know not where but wheresoever, i wish him well.
it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to.
lord angelo dukes it well in his absence he puts transgression to 't.
he does well in 't.
a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in something too crabbed that way, friar.
it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down.
they say this angelo was not made by man and is it true, think you?
how should he be made, then?
some report a seamaid spawned him some, that he was begot between two stockfishes.
but it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice and he is a motion generative that's infallible.
you are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a man!
would the duke that is absent have done this?
ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
i never heard the absent duke much detected for women he was not inclined that way.
o, sir, you are deceived.
'tis not possible.
who, not the duke?
yes, your beggar of fifty and his use was to put a ducat in her clack the duke had crotchets in him.
he would be drunk too that let me inform you.
you do him wrong, surely.
sir, i was an inward of his.
a shy fellow was the and i believe i know the cause of his withdrawing.
what, i prithee, might be the cause?
no, pardon 'tis a secret must be locked within the but this i can let you understand, the greater file of the subject held the duke to be wise.
wise!
why, no question but he was.
a very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
either this is the envy in you, folly, the very stream of his life and the business he hath helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation.
let him be but testimonied in his own bringingsforth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.
or if your knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.
sir, i know him, and i love him.
love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.
come, sir, i know what i know.
i can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.
but, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him.
if it be honest you have spoke, i am bound to call upon you and, i pray you, your name?
sir, my name is lucio well known to the duke.
he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report you.
i fear you not.
o, you hope the duke will return no more or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite.
but indeed i can do you little harm you'll forswear this again.
i' thou art deceived in me, friar.
but no more of this.
canst thou tell if claudio die tomorrow or no?
why should he die, sir?
why?
for filling a bottle with a tundish.
i would the ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency sparrows must not build in his houseeaves, because they are lecherous.
the duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered he would would he were returned!
marry, this claudio is condemned for untrussing.
farewell, i prithee, pray for me.
the duke, i say to thee again, would eat mutton on fridays.
he's not past it yet, and i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown say that i said so.
farewell.
no might nor greatness in mortality can censure 'scape backwounding calumny the whitest virtue strikes.
what king so strong can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
but who comes here?
go away with her to prison!
good my lord, be good to me your honour is accounted a merciful man good my lord.
double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind!
this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your honour.
my lord, this is one lucio's information against me.
mistress kate keepdown was with child by him in the duke's time his child is a year and a quarter old, i have kept it myself and see how he goes about to abuse me!
let him be called before us.
away with her to prison!
go to no more words.
provost, my brother angelo will not be altered claudio must die to let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
so please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.
good even, good father.
bliss and goodness on you!
of whence are you?
not of this country, though my chance is now i am a brother of gracious order, late come from the see in special business from his holiness.
what news abroad i' the world?
none, but that there is so great a fever on goodness, novelty is only in request and it is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous to be constant in any undertaking.
there is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure but much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world.
this news is old enough, yet it is every day's news.
i pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?
one that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.
what pleasure was he given to?
rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at a gentleman of all temperance.
but leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous and let me desire to know how you find claudio prepared.
i am made to understand that you have lent him visitation.
he professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving promises of life which i by my good leisure have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.
you have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt of your calling.
i have laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest but my brother justice have i found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed justice.
if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it shall become him well wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.
i am going to visit the prisoner.
fare you well.
peace be with you!
he who the sword of heaven will bear should be as holy as severe pattern in himself to know, grace to stand, and virtue go more nor less to others paying than by selfoffences weighing.
shame to him whose cruel striking kills for faults of his own liking!
twice treble shame on angelo, to weed my vice and let his grow!
o, what may man within him hide, though angel on the outward side!
how may likeness made in crimes, making practise on the times, to draw with idle spiders' strings most ponderous and substantial things!
with angelo tonight shall lie his old betrothed but despised so disguise shall, by the disguised, pay with falsehood false exacting, and perform an old contracting.
break off thy song, here comes a man of comfort, whose advice hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
i cry you mercy, sir and well could wish let me excuse me, and believe me so, my mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
'tis good though music oft hath such a charm to make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
i pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired for me here today?
much upon this time have i promised here to meet.
i have sat here all day.
i do constantly believe you.
the time is come even now.
may be i will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
i am always bound to you.
very well met, and well come.
what is the news from this good deputy?
he hath a garden circummured with brick, whose western side is with a vineyard back'd and to that vineyard is a planched gate, this other doth command a little door which from the vineyard to the garden leads there have i made my promise upon the heavy middle of the night to call upon him.
but shall you on your knowledge find this way?
i have ta'en a due and wary note upon' with whispering and most guilty diligence, in action all of precept, he did show me the way twice o'er.
are there no other tokens between you 'greed concerning her observance?
no, none, but only a repair i' the dark and that i have possess'd him my most stay can be but brief for i have made him know i have a servant comes with me along, that stays upon me, whose persuasion is i come about my brother.
'tis well borne up.
i have not yet made known to mariana a word of this.
what, ho!
within!
come forth!
i pray you, be acquainted with this maid she comes to do you good.
i do desire the like.
do you persuade yourself that i respect you?
good friar, i know you do, and have found it.
take, then, this your companion by the hand, who hath a story ready for your ear.
but make haste the vaporous night approaches.
will't please you walk aside?
o place and greatness!
millions of false eyes volumes of report run with these false and most contrarious quests thousand escapes of wit make thee the father of their idle dreams and rack thee in their fancies.
welcome, how agreed?
she'll take the enterprise upon her, father, if you advise it.
it is not my consent, but my entreaty too.
little have you to say when you depart from him, but, soft and low, 'remember now my brother.
' fear me not.
nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
he is your husband on a pre to bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, sith that the justice of your title to him doth flourish the deceit.
come, our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
come hither, sirrah.
can you cut off a man's head?
if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can but if he be a married man, he's his wife's head, and i can never cut off a woman's head.
come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer.
tomorrow morning are to die claudio and barnardine.
here is in our prison a common executioner, if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your gyves if not, you shall have your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a notorious bawd.
sir, i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind but yet i will be content to be a lawful hangman.
i would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.
what, ho!
abhorson!
where's abhorson, there?
do you call, sir?
sirrah, here's a fellow will help you tomorrow in your execution.
if you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you if not, use him for the present and dismiss him.
he cannot plead his estimation with you he hath been a bawd.
a bawd, sir?
fie upon him!
he will discredit our mystery.
go to, sir you weigh equally a feather will turn the scale.
pray, sir, by your good favour,for surely, sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a hanging look,do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?
ay, sir a mystery painting, sir, i have heard say, is a mystery and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, but what mystery there should be in hanging, if i should be hanged, i cannot imagine.
sir, it is a mystery.
proof?
every true man' if it be too little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough if it be too big for your thief, your so every true man's apparel fits your thief.
are you agreed?
sir, i will serve him for i do find your hangman is a more penitent trade than your bawd he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
you, sirrah, provide your block and your axe tomorrow four o'clock.
come on, bawd i will instruct thee in my trade follow.
i do desire to learn, and i hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare for truly, sir, for your kindness i owe you a good turn.
the one has my pity not a jot the other, being a murderer, though he were my brother.
look, here's the warrant, claudio, 'tis now dead midnight, and by eight tomorrow thou must be made immortal.
where's barnardine?
as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour when it lies starkly in the traveller' he will not wake.
who can do good on him?
well, go, prepare yourself.
but, hark, what noise?
heaven give your spirits comfort!
by and by.
i hope it is some pardon or reprieve for the most gentle claudio.
welcome father.
the best and wholesomest spirts of the night envelope you, good provost!
who call'd here of late?
none, since the curfew rung.
not isabel?
they will, then, ere't be long.
what comfort is for claudio?
there's some in hope.
it is a bitter deputy.
not so, not so his life is parallel'd he doth with holy abstinence subdue that in himself which he spurs on his power were he meal'd with that which he corrects, then were he tyrannous but this being so, he's just.
now are they come.
seldom when the steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
how now!
what noise?
that spirit's possessed with haste that wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.
there he must stay until the officer he is call'd up.
have you no countermand for claudio yet, but he must die tomorrow?
none, sir, none.
as near the dawning, provost, as it is, you shall hear more ere morning.
happily you something know yet i believe there comes no countermand besides, upon the very siege of justice lord angelo hath to the public ear profess'd the contrary.
this is his lordship's man.
and here comes claudio's pardon.
i shall obey him.
i told you.
lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted puttingon methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.
pray you, let's hear.
what is that barnardine who is to be executed in the afternoon?
a bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred one that is a prisoner nine years old.
how came it that the absent duke had not either delivered him to his liberty or executed him?
i have heard it was ever his manner to do so.
and, indeed, his fact, till now in the government of lord angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.
it is now apparent?
most manifest, and not denied by himself.
hath he born himself penitently in prison?
how seems he to be touched?
a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep careless, reckless, and fearless of what's past, present, or to come insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.
he wants advice.
he hath evermore had the liberty of the prison give him leave to escape hence, he drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk.
we have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming it hath not moved him at all.
more of him anon.
there is written in your brow, provost, if i read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me but, in the boldness of my cunning, i will lay myself in hazard.
claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than angelo who hath sentenced him.
to make you understand this in a manifested effect, i crave but four days' respite for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.
pray, sir, in what?
in the delaying death.
a lack, how may i do it, having the hour limited, and an express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of angelo?
i may make my case as claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.
by the vow of mine order i warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide.
let this barnardine be this morning executed, and his head born to angelo.
angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
o, death's a great disguiser and you may add to it.
shave the head, and tie the beard and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his you know the course is common.
if any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom i profess, i will plead against it with my life.
pardon me, good father it is against my oath.
were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
to him, and to his substitutes.
you will think you have made no offence, if the duke avouch the justice of your dealing?
but what likelihood is in that?
not a resemblance, but a certainty.
yet since i see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion can with ease attempt you, i will go further than i meant, to pluck all fears out of you.
look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the you know the character, i doubt not and the signet is not strange to you.
i know them both.
you shall anon overread it at your pleasure where you shall find, within these two days he will be here.
this is a thing that angelo knows not for he this very day receives letters of strange tenor perchance of the duke's death perchance entering into some monastery but, by chance, nothing of what is writ.
look, the unfolding star calls up the shepherd.
put not yourself into amazement how these all difficulties are but easy when they are known.
call your executioner, and off with barnardine' i will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place.
yet you are amazed but this shall absolutely resolve you.
come away it is almost clear dawn.
i am as well acquainted here as i was in our house one would think it were mistress overdone's own house, for here be many of her old customers.
first, here's young master rash he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger, ninescore and seventeen pounds of which he made five marks, marry, then ginger was not much in request, for the old women were all dead.
then is there here one master caper, at the suit of master threepile the mercer, for some four suits of peachcoloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
then have we here young dizy, and young master deepvow, and master copperspur, and master starvelackey the rapier and dagger man, and young dropheir that killed lusty pudding, and master forthlight the tilter, and brave master shooty the great traveller, and wild halfcan that stabbed pots, and, i think, forty more all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the lord's sake.
' sirrah, bring barnardine hither.
master barnardine!
you must rise and be hanged.
master barnardine!
what, ho, barnardine!
your friends, sir the hangman.
you must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.
tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
pray, master barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep afterwards.
go in to him, and fetch him out.
he is coming, sir, he is coming i hear his straw rustle.
is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
very ready, sir.
how now, abhorson?
what's the news with you?
truly, sir, i would desire you to clap into your prayers for, look you, the warrant's come.
you rogue, i have been drinking all night i am not fitted for 't.
o, the better, sir for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day.
look you, sir do we jest now, think you?
sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, i am come to advise you, comfort you and pray with you.
friar, not i i have been drinking hard all night, and i will have more time to prepare me, or they i will not consent to die this day, that's certain.
o, sir, and therefore i beseech you look forward on the journey you shall go.
i swear i will not die today for any man's persuasion.
but hear you.
if you have any thing to say to me, come to my ward for thence will not i today.
o gravel heart!
after him, fellows bring him to the block.
now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
a creature unprepared, unmeet for death and to transport him in the mind he is were damnable.
here in the prison, father, there died this morning of a cruel fever one ragozine, a most notorious pirate, a man of claudio's years his beard and head just of his colour.
what if we do omit this reprobate till he were well inclined and satisfy the deputy with the visage of ragozine, more like to claudio?
o, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
dispatch it presently the hour draws on prefix' see this be done, and sent according to command whiles i persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
this shall be done, good father, presently.
and how shall we continue claudio, to save me from the danger that might come if he were known alive?
let this be done.
put them in secret holds, ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting to the under generation, you shall find your safety manifested.
i am your free dependant.
quick, dispatch, and send the head to angelo.
now will i write letters to angelo, the provost, he shall bear them, whose contents shall witness to him i am near at home, and that, by great injunctions, i am bound him i'll desire to meet me at the consecrated fount a league below the city and from thence, by cold gradation and wellbalanced form, we shall proceed with angelo.
here is the head i'll carry it myself.
convenient is it.
make a swift return for i would commune with you of such things that want no ear but yours.
i'll make all speed.
the tongue of isabel.
she's come to know if yet her brother' but i will keep her ignorant of her good, to make her heavenly comforts of despair, when it is least expected.
ho, by your leave!
good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
the better, given me by so holy a man.
hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
he hath released him, isabel, his head is off and sent to angelo.
nay, but it is not so.
show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.
o, i will to him and pluck out his eyes!
you shall not be admitted to his sight.
unhappy claudio!
wretched isabel!
injurious world!
most damned angelo!
this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot forbear it therefore give your cause to heaven.
mark what i say, which you shall find the duke comes home tomorrow nay, dry your eyes one of our convent, and his confessor, already he hath carried notice to escalus and angelo, who do prepare to meet him at the gates, there to give up their power.
if you can, pace your wisdom in that good path that i would wish it go, and you shall have your bosom on this wretch, grace of the duke, revenges to your heart, and general honour.
i am directed by you.
this letter, then, to friar peter give 'tis that he sent me of the duke' say, by this token, i desire his company at mariana's house tonight.
her cause and yours i'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you before the duke, and to the head of angelo accuse him home and home.
for my poor self, i am combined by a sacred vow and shall be absent.
command these fretting waters from your eyes with a light heart trust not my holy order, if i pervert your course.
who's here?
good even.
friar, where's the provost?
not within, sir.
o pretty isabella, i am pale at mine heart to see thou must be patient.
i am fain to dine and sup with water and bran i dare not for my head fill my belly one fruitful meal would set me to 't.
but they say the duke will be here tomorrow.
by my troth, isabel, if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived.
sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports but the best is, he lives not in them.
friar, he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.
well, you'll answer this one day.
fare ye well.
nay, tarry i'll go along with thee i can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.
you have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true if not true, none were enough.
i was once before him for getting a wench with child.
did you such a thing?
yes, marry, did i but i was fain to forswear it they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.
sir, your company is fairer than honest.
rest you well.
by my troth, i'll go with thee to the lane' if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of it.
nay, friar, i am a kind of burr i shall stick.
every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.
in most uneven and distracted manner.
his actions pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted!
and why meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there i guess not.
and why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
to have a dispatch of complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.
well, i beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes i' the morn i' give notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet him.
i shall, sir.
fare you well.
good night.
this deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant and dull to all proceedings.
a deflower'd maid!
and by an eminent body that enforced the law against it!
but that her tender shame will not proclaim against her maiden loss, how might she tongue me!
yet reason dares her no for my authority bears of a credent bulk, that no particular scandal once can touch but it confounds the breather.
he should have lived, save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense, might in the times to come have ta'en revenge, by so receiving a dishonour'd life with ransom of such shame.
would yet he had lived!
a lack, when once our grace we have forgot, we would, and we would not.
these letters at fit time deliver me the provost knows our purpose and our plot.
the matter being afoot, keep your instruction, and hold you ever to our special drift though sometimes you do blench from this to that, as cause doth minister.
go call at flavius' house, give the like notice to valentinus, rowland, and to crassus, and bid them bring the trumpets to the gate but send me flavius first.
it shall be speeded well.
i thank thee, varrius come, we will walk.
there's other of our friends will greet us here anon, my gentle varrius.
i would say the truth but to accuse him so, yet i am advised to do it he says, to veil full purpose.
be ruled by him.
besides, he tells me that, if peradventure he speak against me on the adverse side, i should not think it strange for 'tis a physic that's bitter to sweet end.
i would friar peter o, peace!
the friar is come.
come, i have found you out a stand most fit, where you may have such vantage on the duke, he shall not pass you.
twice have the trumpets sounded the generous and gravest citizens have hent the gates, and very near upon therefore, hence, away!
my very worthy cousin, fairly met!
our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
happy return be to your royal grace!
many and hearty thankings to you both.
we have made inquiry of you and we hear such goodness of your justice, that our soul cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, forerunning more requital.
you make my bonds still greater.
o, your desert speaks loud and i should wrong it, to lock it in the wards of covert bosom, when it deserves, with characters of brass, a forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time and razure of oblivion.
give me your hand, and let the subject see, to make them know that outward courtesies would fain proclaim favours that keep within.
come, escalus, you must walk by us on our other hand and good supporters are you.
speak loud and kneel before him.
justice, o royal duke!
vail your regard upon a wrong'd, i would fain have said, a maid!
o worthy prince, dishonour not your eye by throwing it on any other object till you have heard me in my true complaint and given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
relate your wrongs in what?
by whom?
be brief.
reveal yourself to him.
o worthy duke, hear me yourself for that which i must speak must either punish me, not being believed, or wring redress from you.
hear me, o hear me, here!
my lord, her wits, i fear me, she hath been a suitor to me for her brother cut off by course of justice, by course of justice!
and she will speak most bitterly and strange.
most strange, but yet most truly, that angelo's forsworn is it not strange?
that angelo's a murderer is 't not strange?
that angelo is an adulterous thief, an hypocrite, a virginviolator is it not strange and strange?
nay, it is ten times strange.
it is not truer he is angelo nay, it is ten times true for truth is truth to the end of reckoning.
away with her!
poor soul, she speaks this in the infirmity of sense.
o prince, i conjure thee, as thou believest there is another comfort than this world, that thou neglect me not, with that opinion that i am touch'd with madness!
make not impossible 'tis not impossible but one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground, may seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute as angelo even so may angelo, in all his dressings, characts, titles, forms, be an archvillain believe it, if he be less, he's nothing but he's more, had i more name for badness.
by mine honesty, if she be mad,as i believe no other, her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, such a dependency of thing on thing, as e'er i heard in madness.
o gracious duke, harp not on that, nor do not banish reason for inequality but let your reason serve to make the truth appear where it seems hid, and hide the false seems true.
many that are not mad have, sure, more lack of reason.
what would you say?
i am the sister of one claudio, condemn'd upon the act of fornication to lose his head condemn' i, in probation of a sisterhood, was sent to by my brother one lucio as then the messenger, that's i, an' i came to her from claudio, and desired her to try her gracious fortune with lord angelo for her poor brother's pardon.
that's he indeed.
you were not bid to speak.
no, my good lord nor wish'd to hold my peace.
i wish you now, then pray you, and when you have a business for yourself, pray heaven you then be perfect.
i warrant your honour.
the warrants for yourself take heed to't.
this gentleman told somewhat of my tale, right.
it may be right but you are i' the wrong to speak before your time.
proceed.
i went to this pernicious caitiff deputy, that's somewhat madly spoken.
pardon it the phrase is to the matter.
mended again.
the matter proceed.
in brief, to set the needless process by, how i persuaded, how i pray'd, and kneel'd, how he refell'd me, and how i replied, for this was of much length,the vile conclusion he would not, but by gift of my chaste body to his concupiscible intemperate lust, release my brother and, after much debatement, my sisterly remorse confutes mine honour, but the next morn betimes, his purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant for my poor brother's head.
this is most likely!
o, that it were as like as it is true!
by heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st, or else thou art suborn'd against his honour in hateful practise.
first, his integrity stands without blemish.
next, it imports no reason that with such vehemency he should pursue if he had so offended, he would have weigh'd thy brother by himself and not have cut him off.
confess the truth, and say by whose advice thou camest here to complain.
and is this all?
then, o you blessed ministers above, keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time unfold the evil which is here wrapt up in countenance!
heaven shield your grace from woe, as i, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
i know you'ld fain be gone.
an officer!
to prison with her!
shall we thus permit a blasting and a scandalous breath to fall on him so near us?
this needs must be a practise.
who knew of your intent and coming hither?
one that i would were here, friar lodowick.
a ghostly father, belike.
who knows that lodowick?
my lord, i know him 'tis a meddling friar had he been lay, my lord for certain words he spake against your grace in your retirement, i had swinged him soundly.
words against me?
this is a good friar, belike!
and to set on this wretched woman here against our substitute!
let this friar be found.
but yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, a saucy friar, a very scurvy fellow.
blessed be your royal grace!
i have stood by, my lord, and i have heard your royal ear abused.
first, hath this woman most wrongfully accused your substitute, who is as free from touch or soil with her as she from one ungot.
we did believe no less.
know you that friar lodowick that she speaks of?
i know him for a man divine and holy not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler, as he's reported by this gentleman and, on my trust, a man that never yet did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
my lord, most villanously believe it.
well, he in time may come to clear himself but at this instant he is sick my lord, of a strange fever.
upon his mere request, being come to knowledge that there was complaint intended 'gainst lord angelo, came i hither, to speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know is true and false and what he with his oath and all probation will make up full clear, whensoever he's convented.
first, for this woman.
to justify this worthy nobleman, so vulgarly and personally accused, her shall you hear disproved to her eyes, till she herself confess it.
good friar, let's hear it.
do you not smile at this, lord angelo?
o heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
give us some seats.
come, cousin angelo in this i'll be impartial be you judge of your own cause.
is this the witness, friar?
first, let her show her face, and after speak.
pardon, my lord i will not show my face until my husband bid me.
what, are you married?
no, my lord.
are you a maid?
no, my lord.
a widow, then?
neither, my lord.
why, neither maid, widow, nor wife?
my lord, she may be a punk for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.
i would he had some cause to prattle for himself.
well, my lord.
my lord i do confess i ne'er was married i have known my husband yet my husband knows not that ever he knew me.
he was drunk then, it can be no better.
for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
well, my lord.
this is no witness for lord angelo.
now i come to't my lord she that accuses him of fornication, in selfsame manner doth accuse my husband, and charges him my lord, with such a time when i'll depose i had him in mine arms with all the effect of love.
charges she more than me?
not that i know.
you say your husband.
why, just, my lord, and that is angelo, who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body, but knows he thinks that he knows isabel's.
this is a strange abuse.
let's see thy face.
my husband bids me now i will unmask.
this is that face, thou cruel angelo, which once thou sworest was worth the looking on this is the hand which, with a vow'd contract, was fast belock'd in thine this is the body that took away the match from isabel, and did supply thee at thy gardenhouse in her imagined person.
know you this woman?
carnally, she says.
sirrah, no more!
enough, my lord.
my lord, and five years since there was some speech of marriage betwixt myself and her which was broke off, partly for that her promised proportions came short of composition, but in chief for that her reputation was disvalued since which time of five years i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, upon my faith and honour.
noble prince, as there comes light from heaven and words from breath, as there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, i am affianced this man's wife as strongly and, my good lord, but tuesday night last gone in's gardenhouse he knew me as a wife.
as this is true, let me in safety raise me from my knees or else for ever be confixed here, a marble monument!
now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice my patience here is touch'd.
i do perceive these poor informal women are no more but instruments of some more mightier member let me have way, my lord, to find this practise out.
ay, with my heart and punish them to your height of pleasure.
thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman, compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths, though they would swear down each particular saint, were testimonies against his worth and credit that's seal'd in approbation?
you, lord escalus, sit with my cousin lend him your kind pains to find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
there is another friar that set them on let him be sent for.
would he were here, my lord!
for he indeed your provost knows the place where he abides and he may fetch him.
go do it instantly.
and you, my noble and wellwarranted cousin, whom it concerns to hear this matter forth, do with your injuries as seems you best, i for a while will leave you but stir not you till you have well determined upon these slanderers.
my lord, we'll do it throughly.
signior lucio, did not you say you knew that friar lodowick to be a dishonest person?
'' honest in nothing but in his clothes and one that hath spoke most villanous speeches of the duke.
we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and we shall find this friar a notable fellow.
as any in vienna, on my word.
call that same isabel here once again i would speak with her.
pray you, my lord, give me leave to question you shall see how i'll handle her.
not better than he, by her own report.
say you?
marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, perchance, publicly, she'll be ashamed.
i will go darkly to work with her.
that's the way for women are light at midnight.
come on, here's a gentlewoman denies all that you have said.
my lord, here comes the rascal i spoke of here with the provost.
speak not you to him till we call upon you.
mum.
come, did you set these women on to slander lord angelo?
they have confessed you did.
'tis false.
how!
know you where you are?
respect to your great place!
and let the devil be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
where is the duke?
'tis he should hear me speak.
the duke's in us look you speak justly.
boldly, at least.
but, o, poor souls, come you to seek the lamb here of the fox?
good night to your redress!
is the duke gone?
then is your cause gone too.
the duke's unjust, thus to retort your manifest appeal, and put your trial in the villain's mouth which here you come to accuse.
this is the rascal this is he i spoke of.
why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar, is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women to accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth and in the witness of his proper ear, to call him villain?
and then to glance from him to the duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
take him hence to the rack with him!
we'll touse you joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
what 'unjust'!
be not so hot the duke dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he his subject am i not, nor here provincial.
my business in this state made me a looker on here in vienna, where i have seen corruption boil and bubble till it o'errun the stew laws for all faults, but faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop, as much in mock as mark.
slander to the state!
away with him to prison!
what can you vouch against him, signior lucio?
is this the man that you did tell us of?
'tis he, my lord.
come hither, do you know me?
i remember you, sir, i met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.
o, did you so?
and do you remember what you said of the duke?
most notedly, sir.
do you so, sir?
and was the duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
you must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make you, indeed, spoke so of him and much more, much worse.
o thou damnable fellow!
did not i pluck thee by the nose for thy speeches?
i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
hark, how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses!
such a fellow is not to be talked withal.
away with him to prison!
where is the provost?
away with him to prison!
let him speak no more.
away with those giglots too, and with the other confederate companion!
what, resists he?
help him, lucio.
come, sir come, sir come, sir foh, sir!
why, you baldpated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you?
show your knave's visage, with a pox to you!
show your sheepbiting face, and be hanged an hour!
will't not off?
thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke.
first, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
sneak not away, sir for the friar and you must have a word anon.
lay hold on him.
this may prove worse than hanging.
o my dread lord, i should be guiltier than my guiltiness, to think i can be undiscernible, when i perceive your grace, like power divine, hath look'd upon my passes.
then, good prince, no longer session hold upon my shame, immediate sentence then and sequent death is all the grace i beg.
come hither, mariana.
say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
i was, my lord.
go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
do you the office, friar which consummate, return him here again.
go with him, provost.
my lord, i am more amazed at his dishonour than at the strangeness of it.
come hither, isabel.
as i was then advertising and holy to your business, not changing heart with habit, i am still attorney'd at your service.
o, give me pardon, that i, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd your unknown sovereignty!
you are pardon'd, and now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
your brother's death, i know, sits at your heart and you may marvel why i obscured myself, labouring to save his life, and would not rather make rash remonstrance of my hidden power than let him so be lost.
o most kind maid, it was the swift celerity of his death, which i did think with slower foot came on, that brain'd my purpose.
but, peace be with him!
that life is better life, past fearing death, make it your comfort, so happy is your brother.
i do, my lord.
for this newmarried man approaching here, whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd your well defended honour, you must pardon for mariana' but as he adjudged your brother, being criminal, in double violation of sacred chastity and of promisebreach thereon dependent, for your brother's life, the very mercy of the law cries out most audible, even from his proper tongue, 'an angelo for claudio, death for death!
' haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
then, angelo, thy fault's thus manifested which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
we do condemn thee to the very block where claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
away with him!
o my most gracious lord, i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
it is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
consenting to the safeguard of your honour, i thought your marriage fit else imputation, for that he knew you, might reproach your life and choke your good to come for his possessions, although by confiscation they are ours, we do instate and widow you withal, to buy you a better husband.
o my dear lord, i crave no other, nor no better man.
never crave him we are definitive.
gentle my liege, you do but lose your labour.
away with him to death!
now, sir, to you.
o my good lord!
sweet isabel, take my part lend me your knees, and all my life to come i'll lend you all my life to do you service.
should she kneel down in mercy of this fact, her brother's ghost his paved bed would break, and take her hence in horror.
isabel, sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me hold up your hands, say nothing i'll speak all.
they say, best men are moulded out of faults and, for the most, become much more the better so may my husband.
o isabel, will you not lend a knee?
he dies for claudio's death.
most bounteous sir, look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd, i partly think a due sincerity govern'd his deeds, since it is so, let him not die.
my brother had but justice, for angelo, his act did not o'ertake his bad intent, and must be buried but as an intent that perish' thoughts are no subjects intents but merely thoughts.
merely, my lord.
your suit's unprofitable stand up, i say.
i have bethought me of another fault.
provost, how came it claudio was beheaded at an unusual hour?
it was commanded so.
had you a special warrant for the deed?
no, my good lord it was by private message.
give up your keys.
pardon me, i thought it was a fault, but knew it not yet did repent me, after more advice for testimony whereof, one in the prison, that should by private order else have died, i have reserved alive.
what's he?
his name is barnardine.
i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
go fetch him hither let me look upon him.
i am sorry, one so learned and so wise as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd, should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.
and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart that i crave death more willingly than mercy 'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.
which is that barnardine?
this, my lord.
there was a friar told me of this man.
sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul.
that apprehends no further than this world, and squarest thy life according.
thou'rt condemn' but, for those earthly faults, i quit them all and pray thee take this mercy to provide for better times to come.
friar, advise him i leave him to your hand.
what muffled fellow's that?
this is another prisoner that i saved.
who should have died when claudio lost his head as like almost to claudio as himself.
'faith, my lord.
i spoke it but according to the trick.
if you will hang me for it, you may but i had rather it would please you i might be whipt.
whipt first, sir, and hanged after.
proclaim it, provost, round about the city.
is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow, as i have heard him swear himself there's one whom he begot with child, let her appear, the nuptial finish'd, let him be whipt and hang'd.
i beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
your highness said even now, good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.
upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
thy slanders i forgive and therewithal remit thy other forfeits.
take him to prison and see our pleasure herein executed.
marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.
slandering a prince deserves it.
she, claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
joy to you, mariana!
love her, i have confess'd her and i know her virtue.
thanks, good friend escalus, there's more behind that is more gratulate.
thanks, provost, we shill employ thee in a worthier place.
forgive him, angelo, that brought you home the head of ragozine for claudio' the offence pardons itself.
dear isabel, i have a motion much imports your good whereto if you'll a willing ear incline, what's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.
so, bring us to our palace where we'll show what's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.
i'll pheeze you, in faith.
a pair of stocks, you rogue!
the slys are no rogues look in the chronicles we came in with richard conqueror.
therefore paucas pallabris sessa!
you will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
no, not a denier.
go by, go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
i know my remedy i must go fetch the thirdborough.
third, or fourth, or fifth borough, i'll answer him i'll not budge an inch, let him come, and kindly.
huntsman, i charge thee, brach merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd and couple clowder with the deepmouth'd brach.
saw'st thou not, boy, how silver made it good at the hedgecorner, in the coldest fault?
i would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
why, belman is as good as he, my lord he cried upon it at the merest loss and twice today pick' trust me, i take him for the better dog.
if echo were as fleet, i would esteem him worth a dozen such.
tomorrow i intend to hunt again.
i will, my lord.
what's here?
one dead, or drunk?
see, doth he breathe?
he breathes, my lord.
were he not warm'd with ale, this were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
o monstrous beast!
how like a swine he lies!
grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
sirs, i will practise on this drunken man.
what think you, if he were convey'd to bed, wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, a most delicious banquet by his bed, and brave attendants near him when he wakes, would not the beggar then forget himself?
believe me, lord, i think he cannot choose.
it would seem strange unto him when he waked.
even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
carry him gently to my fairest chamber balm his foul head in warm distilled waters procure me music ready when he wakes, to make a dulcet and a heavenly sound and if he chance to speak, be ready straight and with a low submissive reverence say 'what is it your honour will command?
' let one attend him with a silver basin full of rosewater and bestrew'd with flowers, another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, and say 'will't please your lordship cool your hands?
' some one be ready with a costly suit and ask him what apparel he will wear another tell him of his hounds and horse, persuade him that he hath been lunatic and when he says he is, say that he dreams, for he is nothing but a mighty lord.
this do and do it kindly, it will be pastime passing excellent, if it be husbanded with modesty.
my lord, i warrant you we will play our part, as he shall think by our true diligence he is no less than what we say he is.
take him up gently and to bed with him and each one to his office when he wakes.
sirrah, go see what trumpet ' belike, some noble gentleman that means, travelling some journey, to repose him here.
how now!
who is it?
an't please your honour, players that offer service to your lordship.
bid them come near.
now, fellows, you are welcome.
we thank your honour.
do you intend to stay with me tonight?
so please your lordship to accept our duty.
with all my heart.
this fellow i remember, since once he play'd a farmer' 'twas where you woo' i have forgot your name but, sure, that part was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.
i think 'twas soto that your honour means.
' thou didst it excellent.
well, you are come to me in a happy time the rather for i have some sport in hand wherein your cunning can assist me much.
there is a lord will hear you play to but i am doubtful of your modesties lest overeyeing of his odd behavior, for yet his honour never heard a play you break into some merry passion and so offend him for i tell you, sirs, if you should smile he grows impatient.
fear not, we can contain ourselves, were he the veriest antic in the world.
go, sirrah, take them to the buttery, let them want nothing that my house affords.
sirrah, go you to barthol'mew my page, and see him dress' that done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber and call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
tell him from me, as he will win my love, he bear himself with honourable action, such as he hath observed in noble ladies unto their lords, such duty to the drunkard let him do with soft low tongue and lowly courtesy, and say 'what is't your honour will command, wherein your lady and your humble wife may show her duty and make known her love?
' and then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, and with declining head into his bosom, bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd to see her noble lord restored to health, who for this seven years hath esteem'd him and if the boy have not a woman's gift to rain a shower of commanded tears, an onion will do well for such a shift, which in a napkin being close convey'd shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
see this dispatch' anon i'll give thee more instructions.
i know the boy will well usurp the grace, voice, i long to hear him call the drunkard husband, and how my men will stay themselves from laughter when they do homage to this simple peasant.
i'll in to counsel them haply my presence may well abate the overmerry spleen which otherwise would grow into extremes.
for god's sake, a pot of small ale.
will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
will't please your honour taste of these conserves?
what raiment will your honour wear today?
i am christophero sly call not me 'honour' nor '' i ne'er drank sack in my life and if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of ne'er ask me what raiment i'll wear for i have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet nay, sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather.
heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
o, that a mighty man of such descent, of such possessions and so high esteem, should be infused with so foul a spirit!
what, would you make me mad?
am not i christopher sly, old sly's son of burtonheath, by birth a pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker?
ask marian hacket, the fat alewife of wincot, if if she say i am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lyingest knave in christendom.
what!
i am not here's o, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
o, this is it that makes your servants droop!
hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house, as beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
o noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth, call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment and banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
look how thy servants do attend on thee, each in his office ready at thy beck.
wilt thou have music?
hark!
apollo plays, or wilt thou sleep?
we'll have thee to a couch softer and sweeter than the lustful bed on purpose trimm'd up for semiramis.
say thou wilt walk or wilt thou ride?
thy horses shall be trapp'd, their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
dost thou love hawking?
thou hast hawks will soar above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt?
thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them and fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
say thou wilt course thy greyhounds are as swift as breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
dost thou love pictures?
we will fetch thee straight adonis painted by a running brook, and cytherea all in sedges hid, which seem to move and wanton with her breath, even as the waving sedges play with wind.
we'll show thee io as she was a maid, and how she was beguiled and surprised, as lively painted as the deed was done.
or daphne roaming through a thorny wood, scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, and at that sight shall sad apollo weep, so workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
thou art a lord, thou hast a lady far more beautiful than any woman in this waning age.
and till the tears that she hath shed for thee like envious floods o'errun her lovely face, she was the fairest creature in the world and yet she is inferior to none.
am i a lord?
and have i such a lady?
or do i dream?
or have i dream'd till now?
i see, i hear, i speak upon my life, i am a lord indeed and not a tinker nor christophero sly.
well, bring our lady hither to our sight and once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
o, how we joy to see your wit restored!
o, that once more you knew but what you are!
these fifteen years you have been in a dream or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
these fifteen years!
by my fay, a goodly nap.
but did i never speak of all that time?
o, yes, my lord, for though you lay here in this goodly chamber, yet would you say ye were beaten out of door and rail upon the hostess of the house and say you would present her at the leet, because she brought stone jugs and no seal' sometimes you would call out for cicely hacket.
ay, the woman's maid of the house.
why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid, nor no such men as you have reckon'd up, as stephen sly and did john naps of greece and peter turph and henry pimpernell and twenty more such names and men as these which never were nor no man ever saw.
now lord be thanked for my good amends!
amen.
thou shalt not lose by it.
how fares my noble lord?
marry, i fare well for here is cheer enough.
where is my wife?
here, what is thy will with her?
are you my wife and will not call me husband?
my men should call me '' i am your goodman.
my husband and my lord, my lord and husband i am your wife in all obedience.
i know it well.
what must i call her?
madam.
al'ce madam, or joan madam?
'madam,' so lords call ladies.
madam wife, they say that i have dream'd and slept above some fifteen year or more.
ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, being all this time abandon'd from your bed.
'tis much.
servants, leave me and her alone.
madam, undress you and come now to bed.
thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you to pardon me yet for a night or two, or, if not so, for your physicians have expressly charged, in peril to incur your former malady, i hope this reason stands for my excuse.
ay, it stands so that i may hardly tarry so long.
but i would be loath to fall into i will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.
your honour's players, heating your amendment, are come to play a pleasant comedy for so your doctors hold it very meet, seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood, therefore they thought it good you hear a play and frame your mind to mirth and merriment, which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
marry, i will, let them play it.
is not a comondy a christmas gambold or a tumblingtrick?
no, my good lord it is more pleasing stuff.
what, household stuff?
it is a kind of history.
well, well see't.
come, madam wife, sit by my side we shall ne'er be younger.
tranio, since for the great desire i had to see fair padua, nursery of arts, i am arrived for fruitful lombardy, the pleasant garden of great italy and by my father's love and leave am arm'd with his good will and thy good company, my trusty servant, well approved in all, here let us breathe and haply institute a course of learning and ingenious studies.
pisa renown'd for grave citizens gave me my being and my father first, a merchant of great traffic through the world, vincetino come of bentivolii.
vincetino's son brought up in florence it shall become to serve all hopes conceived, and therefore, tranio, for the time i study, virtue and that part of philosophy will i apply that treats of happiness by virtue specially to be achieved.
tell me thy mind for i have pisa left and am to padua come, as he that leaves a shallow plash to plunge him in the deep and with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
mi perdonato, gentle master mine, i am in all affected as yourself glad that you thus continue your resolve to suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
only, good master, while we do admire this virtue and this moral discipline, let's be no stoics nor no stocks, i pray or so devote to aristotle's cheques balk logic with acquaintance that you have and practise rhetoric in your common talk music and poesy use to quicken you the mathematics and the metaphysics, fall to them as you find your stomach serves you no profit grows where is no pleasure ta' in brief, sir, study what you most affect.
gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise.
if, biondello, thou wert come ashore, we could at once put us in readiness, and take a lodging fit to entertain such friends as time in padua shall beget.
what company is this?
master, some show to welcome us to town.
gentlemen, importune me no farther, for how i firmly am resolved you know that is, not bestow my youngest daughter if either of you both love katharina, because i know you well and love you well, leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
i pray you, sir, is it your will to make a stale of me amongst these mates?
mates, maid!
how mean you that?
no mates for you, unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
i'faith, sir, i wis it is not half way to her heart but if it were, doubt not her care should be to comb your noddle with a threelegg'd stool and paint your face and use you like a fool.
from all such devils, good lord deliver us!
and me too, good lord!
hush, master!
here' that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
but in the other's silence do i see maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
peace, tranio!
well said, master mum!
and gaze your fill.
gentlemen, that i may soon make good what i have said, bianca, and let it not displease thee, good bianca, for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
a pretty peat!
it is best put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
sister, content you in my discontent.
sir, my books and instruments shall be my company, on them to took and practise by myself.
hark, tranio!
thou may'st hear minerva speak.
signior baptista, will you be so strange?
sorry am i that our good will effects bianca's grief.
why will you mew her up, signior baptista, for this fiend of hell, and make her bear the penance of her tongue?
gentlemen, content ye go in, and for i know she taketh most delight in music, instruments and poetry, schoolmasters will i keep within my house, fit to instruct her youth.
if you, hortensio, or signior gremio, you, know any such, prefer them hither for to cunning men i will be very kind, and liberal and so farewell.
katharina, you may stay for i have more to commune with bianca.
why, and i trust i may go too, may i not?
what, shall i be appointed hours as though, belike, i knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
you may go to the devil' your gifts are so good, here's none will hold you.
their love is not so great, hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, our cakes dough on both sides.
yet for the love i bear my sweet bianca, if i can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, i will wish him to her father.
so will i, but a word, i pray.
though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in bianco's love, to labour and effect one thing specially.
what's that, i pray?
marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
a husband!
a devil.
i say, a husband.
i say, a devil.
thinkest thou, hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
tush, gremio, though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
i cannot tell but i had as lief take her dowry with this condition, to be whipped at the high cross every morning.
faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten apples.
but come since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained all by helping baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to't a fresh.
sweet bianca!
happy man be his dole!
he that runs fastest gets the ring.
how say you, signior gremio?
i am agreed and would i had given him the best horse in padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the house of her!
come on.
i pray, sir, tell me, is it possible that love should of a sudden take such hold?
o tranio, till i found it to be true, i never thought it possible or likely but see, while idly i stood looking on, and now in plainness do confess to thee, that art to me as secret and as dear as anna to the queen of carthage was, tranio, i burn, i pine, i perish, tranio, if i achieve not this young modest girl.
counsel me, tranio, for i know thou canst assist me, tranio, for i know thou wilt.
master, it is no time to chide you now if love have touch'd you, nought remains but so, 'redime te captum quam queas minimo.
' gramercies, lad, go forward the rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
master, you look'd so longly on the maid, perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
o yes, i saw sweet beauty in her face, such as the daughter of agenor had, that made great jove to humble him to her hand.
when with his knees he kiss'd the cretan strand.
saw you no more?
mark'd you not how her sister began to scold and raise up such a storm that mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
tranio, i saw her coral lips to move sacred and sweet was all i saw in her.
nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
i pray, awake, if you love the maid, bend thoughts and wits to achieve her.
her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd that till the father rid his hands of her, master, your love must live a maid at home and therefore has he closely mew'd her up, because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
ah, tranio, what a cruel father's he!
but art thou not advised, he took some care to get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
ay, marry, am i, sir and now 'tis plotted.
i have it, tranio.
master, for my hand, both our inventions meet and jump in one.
tell me thine first.
you will be schoolmaster that's your device.
may it be done?
not possible for who shall bear your part, and be in padua here vincentio's son, keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, visit his countrymen and banquet them?
basta content thee, for i have it full.
we have not yet been seen in any house, nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces for man or master then it follows thus thou shalt be master, tranio, in my stead, i will some other be, some florentine, some neapolitan, or meaner man of pisa.
'tis hatch' tranio, at once uncase thee take my colour' when biondello comes, he waits on thee but i will charm him first to keep his tongue.
so had you need.
in brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is, and i am tied to be obedient for so your father charged me at our parting, 'be serviceable to my son,' quoth he, although i think 'twas in another sense i am content to be lucentio, because so well i love lucentio.
tranio, be so, and let me be a slave, to achieve that maid whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.
here comes the rogue.
sirrah, where have you been?
where have i been!
nay, how now!
where are you?
master, has my fellow tranio stolen your clothes?
or you stolen his?
or both?
pray, what's the news?
sirrah, 'tis no time to jest, and therefore frame your manners to the time.
your fellow tranio here, to save my life, puts my apparel and my countenance on, and i for my escape have put on his for in a quarrel since i came ashore i kill' wait you on him, i charge you, as becomes, you understand me?
i, sir!
ne'er a whit.
tranio is changed into lucentio.
would i were so too!
so could i, faith, boy, to have the next wish after, that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter.
but, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, i advise when i am alone, why, then i am tranio but in all places else your master lucentio.
tranio, let' one thing more rests, that thyself execute, if thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.
my lord, you nod you do not mind the play.
yes, by saint anne, do i.
a good matter, comes there any more of it?
my lord, 'tis but begun.
'tis a very excellent piece of work, would 'twere done!
verona, for a while i take my leave, to see my friends in padua, but of all my best beloved and approved friend, hortensio and i trow this is his house.
here, sirrah grumio knock, i say.
knock, sir!
whom should i knock?
is there man has rebused your worship?
villain, i say, knock me here soundly.
knock you here, sir!
why, sir, what am i, sir, that i should knock you here, sir?
villain, i say, knock me at this gate and rap me well, or i'll knock your knave's pate.
my master is grown quarrelsome.
i should knock you first, and then i know after who comes by the worst.
will it not be?
faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, i'll ring it i'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
help, masters, help!
my master is mad.
now, knock when i bid you, sirrah villain!
how now!
what's the matter?
my old friend grumio!
and my good friend petruchio!
how do you all at verona?
signior hortensio, come you to part the fray?
'con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may i say.
'alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio petruchio.
' rise, grumio, we will compound this quarrel.
nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught i see, two and thirty, a pip out?
whom would to god i had well knock'd at first, then had not grumio come by the worst.
a senseless villain!
good hortensio, i bade the rascal knock upon your gate and could not get him for my heart to do it.
knock at the gate!
o heavens!
spake you not these words plain, 'sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly'?
and come you now with, 'knocking at the gate'?
sirrah, be gone, or talk not, i advise you.
petruchio, patience i am grumio' why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you, your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant grumio.
and tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale blows you to padua here from old verona?
such wind as scatters young men through the world, to seek their fortunes farther than at home where small experience grows.
but in a few, signior hortensio, antonio, my father, is deceased and i have thrust myself into this maze, crowns in my purse i have and goods at home, and so am come abroad to see the world.
petruchio, shall i then come roundly to thee and wish thee to a shrewd illfavour'd wife?
thou' and yet i'll promise thee she shall be rich but thou'rt too much my friend, and i'll not wish thee to her.
signior hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we few words suffice and therefore, if thou know one rich enough to be petruchio's wife, as wealth is burden of my wooing dance, be she as foul as was florentius' love, as old as sibyl and as curst and shrewd as socrates' xanthippe, or a worse, she moves me not, or not removes, at least, affection's edge in me, were she as rough i come to wive it wealthily in padua if wealthily, then happily in padua.
nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his why give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an agletbaby or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in, i will continue that i broach'd in jest.
i can, petruchio, help thee to a wife with wealth enough and young and beauteous, her only fault, and that is faults enough, is that she is intolerable curst and shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure that, were my state far worser than it is, i would not wed her for a mine of gold.
hortensio, peace!
thou know'st not gold' tell me her father's name and 'tis enough for i will board her, though she chide as loud as thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
her father is baptista minola, her name is katharina minola, renown'd in padua for her scolding tongue.
i know her father, though i know not her and he knew my deceased father well.
i will not sleep, hortensio, till i see her and therefore let me be thus bold with you to give you over at this first encounter, unless you will accompany me thither.
i pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
o' my word, an she knew him as well as i do, she why, that's nothing an he begin once, he'll rail in his ropetricks.
i'll tell you what sir, an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
you know him not, sir.
tarry, petruchio, i must go with thee, for in baptista' he hath the jewel of my life in hold, his youngest daughter, beautiful binaca, and her withholds from me and other more, suitors to her and rivals in my love, supposing it a thing impossible, for those defects i have before rehearsed, that ever katharina will be woo'd therefore this order hath baptista ta'en, that none shall have access unto bianca till katharina the curst have got a husband.
katharina the curst!
a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
now shall my friend petruchio do me grace, and offer me disguised in sober robes to old baptista as a schoolmaster well seen in music, to instruct bianca that so i may, by this device, at least have leave and leisure to make love to her and unsuspected court her by herself.
here's no knavery!
see, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!
master, master, who goes there, ha?
peace, grumio!
it is the rival of my love.
petruchio, stand by a while.
a proper stripling and an amorous!
o, very well i have perused the note.
hark you, i' all books of love, see that at any hand over and beside signior baptista's liberality, i'll mend it with a largess.
take your paper too, and let me have them very well perfumed for she is sweeter than perfume itself to whom they go to.
what will you read to her?
whate'er i read to her, i'll plead for you as for my patron, stand you so assured, yea, and perhaps with more successful words than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
o this learning, what a thing it is!
o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
peace, sirrah!
grumio, mum!
god save you, signior gremio.
and you are well met, signior hortensio.
trow you whither i am going?
to baptista minola.
i promised to inquire carefully and by good fortune i have lighted well on this young man, for learning and behavior fit for her turn, well read in poetry and other books, good ones, i warrant ye.
'tis well and i have met a gentleman hath promised me to help me to another, a fine musician to instruct our mistress so shall i no whit be behind in duty to fair bianca, so beloved of me.
beloved of me and that my deeds shall prove.
and that his bags shall prove.
gremio, ' listen to me, and if you speak me fair, i'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
here is a gentleman whom by chance i met, upon agreement from us to his liking, will undertake to woo curst katharina, yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
so said, so done, is well.
hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
if that be all, masters, i hear no harm.
no, say'st me so, friend?
what countryman?
born in verona, old antonio' my father dead, my fortune lives for me and i do hope good days and long to see.
o sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
but if you have a stomach, to't i' god' you shall have me assisting you in all.
but will you woo this wildcat?
will i live?
will he woo her?
ay, or i'll hang her.
why came i hither but to that intent?
think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
have i not in my time heard lions roar?
have i not heard the sea puff'd up with winds rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
have i not heard great ordnance in the field, and heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
have i not in a pitched battle heard loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
and do you tell me of a woman's tongue, that gives not half so great a blow to hear as will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
tush, tush!
fear boys with bugs.
for he fears none.
hortensio, this gentleman is happily arrived, my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
i promised we would be contributors and bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.
and so we will, provided that he win her.
i would i were as sure of a good dinner.
gentlemen, god save you.
if i may be bold, tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way to the house of signior baptista minola?
is't he you mean?
even he, biondello.
hark you, sir you mean not her to perhaps, him and her, what have you to do?
not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
i love no chiders, sir.
biondello, let's away.
well begun, tranio.
sir, a word ere you go are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
and if i be, sir, is it any offence?
no if without more words you will get you hence.
why, sir, i pray, are not the streets as free for me as for you?
but so is not she.
for what reason, i beseech you?
for this reason, if you'll know, that she's the choice love of signior gremio.
that she's the chosen of signior hortensio.
softly, my masters!
if you be gentlemen, do me this right hear me with patience.
baptista is a noble gentleman, to whom my father is not all unknown and were his daughter fairer than she is, she may more suitors have and me for one.
fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers and so she shall lucentio shall make one, though paris came in hope to speed alone.
what!
this gentleman will outtalk us all.
sir, i know he'll prove a jade.
hortensio, to what end are all these words?
sir, let me be so bold as ask you, did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
no, sir but hear i do that he hath two, the one as famous for a scolding tongue as is the other for beauteous modesty.
sir, sir, the first's for me let her go by.
yea, leave that labour to great hercules and let it be more than alcides' twelve.
sir, the youngest daughter whom you hearken for her father keeps from all access of suitors, and will not promise her to any man the younger then is free and not before.
if it be so, sir, that you are the man must stead us all and me amongst the rest, and if you break the ice and do this feat, achieve the elder, set the younger free for our access, whose hap shall be to have her will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
sir, you say well and well you do conceive and since you do profess to be a suitor, you must, as we do, gratify this gentleman, to whom we all rest generally beholding.
sir, in sign whereof, please ye we may contrive this afternoon, and quaff carouses to our mistress' health, and do as adversaries do in law, strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
o excellent motion!
fellows, let's be gone.
the motion's good indeed and be it so, petruchio, i shall be your ben venuto.
good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself, to make a bondmaid and a slave of me but for these other gawds, unbind my hands, i'll pull them off myself, yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat or what you will command me will i do, so well i know my duty to my elders.
of all thy suitors, here i charge thee, tell see thou dissemble not.
believe me, sister, of all the men alive i never yet beheld that special face which i could fancy more than any other.
minion, thou liest.
is't not hortensio?
if you affect him, sister, here i swear i'll plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
o then, belike, you will have gremio to keep you fair.
is it for him you do envy me so?
nay then you jest, and now i well perceive i prithee, sister kate, untie my hands.
if that be jest, then all the rest was so.
why, how now, dame!
whence grows this insolence?
bianca, stand aside.
poor girl!
she weeps.
go ply thy needle meddle not with her.
for shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit, why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
when did she cross thee with a bitter word?
her silence flouts me, and i'll be revenged.
what, in my sight?
bianca, get thee in.
what, will you not suffer me?
nay, now i see she is your treasure, she must have a husband i must dance barefoot on her wedding day and for your love to her lead apes in hell.
i will go sit and weep till i can find occasion of revenge.
was ever gentleman thus grieved as i?